<h1>What You'll Be Doing With Semantic Markup:</h1>

<h5>Why Semantics?:</h5>

Semantics refers to words that mean things. What we want to do here is use HTML labels to help us, browsers, and search engines understand what various content on a page is. Are we looking at a headline, an article, or a navigation menu, for example?

If HTML5 doesn't offer a suitable description of your content, you can use the <div> tag with a unique id to define and label sections of your content. See the What you need to know page for links to more information on HTML5 tags and divs.

At this point, our page will still look plain and uninspired, but we're getting close to using these tags to help us style and position elements to our liking. One significant benefit of accurately labeling elements on a page is that we separate the content from the style. If we're delivering content to multiple platforms (desktops, phones, tablets, TV, etc.), we can quickly adjust the rules for how our content is displayed if we know what the content is.

<h5>Project Planning:</h5>

From here on, rather than making meaningless pages, you'll start building towards a project that you can use. A bit further down the line, we'll be using a database into which you can add and retrieve information. Consider what kinds of things you could use a database for and start to build a website that implements that project. Some ideas:

Catalog your books or music:
Build a simple blog (each article a new piece of data)
Build a catalog of goods or services that you offer for sale
Catalog Star Wars or Marvel characters and movies

You could also consider how you could build a web-based database for businesses or charities that you know. Some more ideas:

Build a list of all the churches in your denomination
Build a list of all the churches or ministries in our area
Build a list of church members
Catalog the various services, meetings and ministries in your church
Build a database comparing political candidates or parties on a range of topics

It doesn't matter what kind of project you propose, but it should be one that involves lists of data that you can sort and retrieve in various ways. You can change projects as we move on, though I've added an assignment here that asks you to propose an idea before moving on to the next module. That way you have something you can focus your learning on, and I'll have a chance to make suggestions if you're possibly trying to make something too complex. Remember, the point of this class is not to build a full bells-and-whistles site, but to introduce you to all the tools with which, with more time, you can build something grander. Simple and functional is what we're after here.

Avoid projects that build sites that require you or your users to upload images or other kinds of files. Though such sites can be built, handling file uploads is beyond what you probably want to be needing to mess with here. You'll learn the concepts well enough with a site that is all text.

<h5>Wire Framing/Sketching:</h5>

On paper or on a wire framing app or site (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site., think about how your page will eventually be displayed in a browser window. You should have at least the following components:

Heading, Site title
Site navigation menu
Main content, which might be subdivided up into smaller parts
Footer with copyright, contact information, etc.

These components will take a rectangular form. Most will be horizontal, but some–like a navigation bar–might be vertical. Label all of the boxes on your sketch with a word or two that describes the box's content. You may end up with boxes inside boxes, which is fine.

Review some of these articles on page layout for inspiration.....

<h5>Mockup:</h5>
Using the labels from your sketch or wireframe, create a very simple HTML file with a little bit of placeholder content. Use HTML5 tags or create labeled divs (using the id attribute) for your boxes.

At this point, your page will display all those divs in a vertical stack, though we'll use CSS later to put everything in its place.
