<h1>What You'll Need To Know About CSS Styling:</h1>

<h3>Intro to CSS:</h3>

CSS takes our plain HTML content and helps us deliver it to our users in a much more attractive way. This is why we didn't worry about what our first few pages looked like because with a single file we can spruce up every page on our site.

Some articles to read:

<b>Syntax and Selectors:</b>

-----

<h2>CSS Syntax and Selectors:</h2> (This is especially worth learning because you'll be using the same selectors with JQuery later in the course)

<b>CSS Syntax:</b>

The selector points to the HTML element you want to style.

The declaration block contains one or more declarations separated by semicolons.

Each declaration includes a CSS property name and a value, separated by a colon.

A CSS declaration always ends with a semicolon, and declaration blocks are surrounded by curly braces.

In the following example all <p> elements will be center-aligned, with a red text color:

Example:

```
p {
    color: red;
    text-align: center;
}
```

<h3>CSS Selectors:</h3>

CSS selectors are used to "find" (or select) HTML elements based on their element name, id, class, attribute, and more.

<h4>The element Selector:</h4>

The element selector selects elements based on the element name.

You can select all <p> elements on a page like this (in this case, all <p> elements will be center-aligned, with a red text color):

Example:

```
p {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

<h4>The id Selector:</h4>

The id selector uses the id attribute of an HTML element to select a specific element.

The id of an element should be unique within a page, so the id selector is used to select one unique element!

To select an element with a specific id, write a hash (#) character, followed by the id of the element.

The style rule below will be applied to the HTML element with id="para1":

Example:

```
#para1 {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

Note: An id name cannot start with a number!

<h4>The class Selector:</h4>

The class selector selects elements with a specific class attribute.

To select elements with a specific class, write a period (.) character, followed by the name of the class.

In the example below, all HTML elements with class="center" will be red and center-aligned:

Example:

```
.center {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

You can also specify that only specific HTML elements should be affected by a class.

In the example below, only <p> elements with class="center" will be center-aligned:

Example:

```
p.center {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

HTML elements can also refer to more than one class.

In the example below, the <p> element will be styled according to class="center" and to class="large":

Example:

```
<p class="center large">This paragraph refers to two classes.</p>
```

Note: A class name cannot start with a number!

<h4>Grouping Selectors:</h4>

If you have elements with the same style definitions, like this:

```
h1 {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}

h2 {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}

p {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

It will be better to group the selectors, to minimize the code.

To group selectors, separate each selector with a comma.

In the example below we have grouped the selectors from the code above:

Example:

```
h1, h2, p {
    text-align: center;
    color: red;
}
```

<h4>CSS Comments:</h4>

Comments are used to explain the code, and may help when you edit the source code at a later date.

Comments are ignored by browsers.

A CSS comment starts with / * and ends with * /. Comments can also span multiple lines:

Example:

```
p {
    color: red;
    /* This is a single-line comment */
    text-align: center;
}

/* This is
a multi-line
comment */
```

-----

<b>Types of style sheets </b> (We'll stick to external sheets, but you ought to know the difference between types):

-----

<h2>CSS How To...:</h2>

When a browser reads a style sheet, it will format the HTML document according to the information in the style sheet.

<h4>Three Ways to Insert CSS:</h4>

There are three ways of inserting a style sheet:

<b>External style sheet</b>
<b>Internal style sheet</b>
<b>Inline style</b>

<h4>External Style Sheet:</h4>

With an external style sheet, you can change the look of an entire website by changing just one file!

Each page must include a reference to the external style sheet file inside the <link> element. The <link> element goes inside the <head> section:

Example:

```
<head>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="mystyle.css">
</head>
```

An external style sheet can be written in any text editor. The file should not contain any html tags. The style sheet file must be saved with a .css extension.

Here is how the "mystyle.css" looks:

```
body {
    background-color: lightblue;
}

h1 {
    color: navy;
    margin-left: 20px;
}
```

<b>Note: Do not add a space between the property value and the unit (such as margin-left: 20 px;). The correct way is: margin-left: 20px;</b>

<h4>Internal Style Sheet:</h4>

An internal style sheet may be used if one single page has a unique style.

Internal styles are defined within the <style> element, inside the <head> section of an HTML page:

Example:

```
<head>
<style>
body {
    background-color: linen;
}

h1 {
    color: maroon;
    margin-left: 40px;
}
</style>
</head>
```

<h4>Inline Styles:</h4>

An inline style may be used to apply a unique style for a single element.

To use inline styles, add the style attribute to the relevant element. The style attribute can contain any CSS property.

The example below shows how to change the color and the left margin of a <h1> element:

Example:

```
<h1 style="color:blue;margin-left:30px;">This is a heading</h1>
```

Tip: An inline style loses many of the advantages of a style sheet (by mixing content with presentation). Use this method sparingly.

<h4>Multiple Style Sheets:</h4>

If some properties have been defined for the same selector (element) in different style sheets, the value from the last read style sheet will be used.

Example:

Assume that an external style sheet has the following style for the <h1> element:

```
h1 {
    color: navy;
}
then, assume that an internal style sheet also has the following style for the <h1> element:

h1 {
    color: orange;    
}
```

If the internal style is defined after the link to the external style sheet, the <h1> elements will be "orange":

Example:

```
<head>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="mystyle.css">
<style>
h1 {
    color: orange;
}
</style>
</head>
```

However, if the internal style is defined before the link to the external style sheet, the <h1> elements will be "navy":

Example:

```
<head>
<style>
h1 {
    color: orange;
}
</style>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="mystyle.css">
</head>
```

<h4>Cascading Order:</h4>

What style will be used when there is more than one style specified for an HTML element?

Generally speaking we can say that all the styles will "cascade" into a new "virtual" style sheet by the following rules, where number one has the highest priority:

1- Inline style (inside an HTML element)
2- External and internal style sheets (in the head section)
3- Browser default

So, an inline style (inside a specific HTML element) has the highest priority, which means that it will override a style defined inside the <head> tag, or in an external style sheet, or a browser default value.

-----

<b>How to style text:</b>

-----

<h2>CSS Text [Formatting]:</h2>

<h4>Text Color:</h4>

The color property is used to set the color of the text.

With CSS, a color is most often specified by:

a color name - like "red"
a HEX value - like "#ff0000"
an RGB value - like "rgb(255,0,0)"

The default text color for a page is defined in the body selector.

Example:

```
body {
    color: blue;
}

h1 {
    color: green;
}
```

Note: For W3C compliant CSS: If you define the color property, you must also define the background-color.

<h4>Text Alignment:</h4>

The text-align property is used to set the horizontal alignment of a text.

A text can be left or right aligned, centered, or justified.

The following example shows center aligned, and left and right aligned text (left alignment is default if text direction is left-to-right, and right alignment is default if text direction is right-to-left):

Example:

```
h1 {
    text-align: center;
}

h2 {
    text-align: left;
}

h3 {
    text-align: right;
}
```

When the text-align property is set to "justify", each line is stretched so that every line has equal width, and the left and right margins are straight (like in magazines and newspapers):

Example:

```
div {
    text-align: justify;
}
```

<h4>Text Decoration:</h4>

The text-decoration property is used to set or remove decorations from text.

The value text-decoration: none; is often used to remove underlines from links:

Example:

```
a {
    text-decoration: none;
}
```

The other text-decoration values are used to decorate text:

Example:

```
h1 {
    text-decoration: overline;
}

h2 {
    text-decoration: line-through;
}

h3 {
    text-decoration: underline;
}
```

Note: It is not recommended to underline text that is not a link, as this often confuses the reader.

<h4>Text Transformation:</h4>

The text-transform property is used to specify uppercase and lowercase letters in a text.

It can be used to turn everything into uppercase or lowercase letters, or capitalize the first letter of each word:

Example:

```
p.uppercase {
    text-transform: uppercase;
}

p.lowercase {
    text-transform: lowercase;
}

p.capitalize {
    text-transform: capitalize;
}
```

<h4>Text Indentation:</h4>

The text-indent property is used to specify the indentation of the first line of a text:

Example:

```
p {
    text-indent: 50px;
}
```

<h4>Letter Spacing:</h4>

The letter-spacing property is used to specify the space between the characters in a text.

The following example demonstrates how to increase or decrease the space between characters:

Example:

```
h1 {
    letter-spacing: 3px;
}

h2 {
    letter-spacing: -3px;
}
```

<h4>Line Height:</h4>

The line-height property is used to specify the space between lines:

Example:

```
p.small {
    line-height: 0.8;
}

p.big {
    line-height: 1.8;
}
```

<h4>Text Direction:</h4>

The direction property is used to change the text direction of an element:

Example:

```
div {
    direction: rtl;
}
```

<h4>Word Spacing:</h4>

The word-spacing property is used to specify the space between the words in a text.

The following example demonstrates how to increase or decrease the space between words:

Example:

```
h1 {
    word-spacing: 10px;
}

h2 {
    word-spacing: -5px;
}
```

<h4>Text Shadow:</h4>

The text-shadow property adds shadow to text.

The following example specifies the position of the horizontal shadow (3px), the position of the vertical shadow (2px) and the color of the shadow (red):

Example:

```
h1 {
    text-shadow: 3px 2px red;
}
```

All CSS Text Properties:

<b>color:</b>	Sets the color of text
<b>direction:</b>	Specifies the text direction/writing direction
<b>letter-spacing:</b>	Increases or decreases the space between characters in a text
<b>line-height:</b>	Sets the line height
<b>text-align:</b>	Specifies the horizontal alignment of text
<b>text-decoration:</b>	Specifies the decoration added to text
<b>text-indent:</b>	Specifies the indentation of the first line in a text-block
<b>text-shadow:</b>	Specifies the shadow effect added to text
<b>text-transform:</b>	Controls the capitalization of text
<b>text-overflow:</b>	Specifies how overflowed content that is not displayed should be signaled to the user
<b>unicode-bidi:</b>	Used together with the direction property to set or return whether the text should be overridden to support multiple languages in the same document
<b>vertical-align:</b>	Sets the vertical alignment of an element
<b>white-space:</b>	Specifies how white-space inside an element is handled
<b>word-spacing:</b>	Increases or decreases the space between words in a text

-----

<b>How to style fonts: </b>

-----

<h2>CSS Fonts:</h2>

The CSS font properties define the font family, boldness, size, and the style of a text.

<h4>CSS Font Families:</h4>

In CSS, there are two types of font family names:

<b>generic family</b> - a group of font families with a similar look (like "Serif" or "Monospace")
<b>font family</b> - a specific font family (like "Times New Roman" or "Arial")

Note: On computer screens, sans-serif fonts are considered easier to read than serif fonts.

<h4>Font Family:</h4>

The font family of a text is set with the font-family property.

The font-family property should hold several font names as a "fallback" system. If the browser does not support the first font, it tries the next font, and so on.

Start with the font you want, and end with a generic family, to let the browser pick a similar font in the generic family, if no other fonts are available.

Note: If the name of a font family is more than one word, it must be in quotation marks, like: "Times New Roman".

More than one font family is specified in a comma-separated list:

Example:

```
p {
    font-family: "Times New Roman", Times, serif;
}
```

For commonly used font combinations, look at our Web Safe Font Combinations.

<h4>Font Style:</h4>

The font-style property is mostly used to specify italic text.

This property has three values:

<b>normal</b> - The text is shown normally
<b>italic</b> - The text is shown in italics
<b>oblique</b> - The text is "leaning" (oblique is very similar to italic, but less supported)

Example:

```
p.normal {
    font-style: normal;
}

p.italic {
    font-style: italic;
}

p.oblique {
    font-style: oblique;
}
```

<h4>Font Size:</h4>

The font-size property sets the size of the text.

Being able to manage the text size is important in web design. However, you should not use font size adjustments to make paragraphs look like headings, or headings look like paragraphs.

Always use the proper HTML tags, like <h1> - <h6> for headings and <p> for paragraphs.

The font-size value can be an absolute, or relative size.

<b>Absolute size:</b>

Sets the text to a specified size
Does not allow a user to change the text size in all browsers (bad for accessibility reasons)
Absolute size is useful when the physical size of the output is known

<b>Relative size:</b>

Sets the size relative to surrounding elements
Allows a user to change the text size in browsers

Note: If you do not specify a font size, the default size for normal text, like paragraphs, is 16px (16px=1em).

<h4>Set Font Size With Pixels:</h4>

Setting the text size with pixels gives you full control over the text size:

Example:

```
h1 {
    font-size: 40px;
}

h2 {
    font-size: 30px;
}

p {
    font-size: 14px;
}
```

Tip: If you use pixels, you can still use the zoom tool to resize the entire page.

<h4>Set Font Size With Em:</h4>

To allow users to resize the text (in the browser menu), many developers use em instead of pixels.

The em size unit is recommended by the W3C.

1em is equal to the current font size. The default text size in browsers is 16px. So, the default size of 1em is 16px.

The size can be calculated from pixels to em using this formula: pixels/16=em

Example:

```
h1 {
    font-size: 2.5em; / * 40px/16=2.5em * /
}

h2 {
    font-size: 1.875em; / * 30px/16=1.875em * /
}

p {
    font-size: 0.875em; / * 14px/16=0.875em * /
}
```

In the example above, the text size in em is the same as the previous example in pixels. However, with the em size, it is possible to adjust the text size in all browsers.

Unfortunately, there is still a problem with older versions of IE. The text becomes larger than it should when made larger, and smaller than it should when made smaller.

<h4>Use a Combination of Percent and Em:</h4>

The solution that works in all browsers, is to set a default font-size in percent for the <body> element:

Example:

```
body {
    font-size: 100%;
}

h1 {
    font-size: 2.5em;
}

h2 {
    font-size: 1.875em;
}

p {
    font-size: 0.875em;
}
```

Our code now works great! It shows the same text size in all browsers, and allows all browsers to zoom or resize the text!

<h4>Font Weight:</h4>

The font-weight property specifies the weight of a font:

Example:

```
p.normal {
    font-weight: normal;
}

p.thick {
    font-weight: bold;
}
```

<h4>Font Variant:</h4>

The font-variant property specifies whether or not a text should be displayed in a small-caps font.

In a small-caps font, all lowercase letters are converted to uppercase letters. However, the converted uppercase letters appears in a smaller font size than the original uppercase letters in the text.

Example:

```
p.normal {
    font-variant: normal;
}

p.small {
    font-variant: small-caps;
}
```

All CSS Font Properties:

<b>font:</b>	Sets all the font properties in one declaration
<b>font-family:</b>	Specifies the font family for text
<b>font-size:</b>	Specifies the font size of text
<b>font-style:</b>	Specifies the font style for text
<b>font-variant:</b>	Specifies whether or not a text should be displayed in a small-caps font
<b>font-weight:</b>	Specifies the weight of a font

-----

<b>How to style links:</b>

-----

<h2>CSS Links:</h2>

With CSS, links can be styled in different ways.

<h4>Styling Links:</h4>

Links can be styled with any CSS property (e.g. color, font-family, background, etc.).

Example:

```
a {
    color: hotpink;
}
```

In addition, links can be styled differently depending on what state they are in.

The four links states are:

<b>a:link</b> - a normal, unvisited link
<b>a:visited</b> - a link the user has visited
<b>a:hover</b> - a link when the user mouses over it
<b>a:active</b> - a link the moment it is clicked

Example:

```
/ * unvisited link * /
a:link {
    color: red;
}

/ * visited link * /
a:visited {
    color: green;
}

/ * mouse over link * /
a:hover {
    color: hotpink;
}

/ * selected link * /
a:active {
    color: blue;
}
```

When setting the style for several link states, there are some order rules:

<b>a:hover MUST come after a:link and a:visited
a:active MUST come after a:hover</b>

<h4>Text Decoration:</h4>

The text-decoration property is mostly used to remove underlines from links:

Example:

```
a:link {
    text-decoration: none;
}

a:visited {
    text-decoration: none;
}

a:hover {
    text-decoration: underline;
}

a:active {
    text-decoration: underline;
}
```

<h4>Background Color:</h4>

The background-color property can be used to specify a background color for links:

Example:

```
a:link {
    background-color: yellow;
}

a:visited {
    background-color: cyan;
}

a:hover {
    background-color: lightgreen;
}

a:active {
    background-color: hotpink;
}
```

<h4>Advanced - Link Buttons:</h4>

This example demonstrates a more advanced example where we combine several CSS properties to display links as boxes/buttons:

Example:

```
a:link, a:visited {
    background-color: #f44336;
    color: white;
    padding: 14px 25px;
    text-align: center;
    text-decoration: none;
    display: inline-block;
}

a:hover, a:active {
    background-color: red;
}
```

-----

<b>How to style lists:</b>

-----

<h2>CSS Lists:</h2>

<h4>HTML Lists and CSS List Properties:</h4>

In HTML, there are two main types of lists:

<b>unordered lists (<ul>)</b> - the list items are marked with bullets
<b>ordered lists (<ol>)</b> - the list items are marked with numbers or letters

The CSS list properties allow you to:

Set different list item markers for ordered lists
Set different list item markers for unordered lists
Set an image as the list item marker
Add background colors to lists and list items

<h4>Different List Item Markers:</h4>

The list-style-type property specifies the type of list item marker.

The following example shows some of the available list item markers:

Example:

```
ul.a {
    list-style-type: circle;
}

ul.b {
    list-style-type: square;
}

ol.c {
    list-style-type: upper-roman;
}

ol.d {
    list-style-type: lower-alpha;
}
```

Note: Some of the values are for unordered lists, and some for ordered lists.

<h4>An Image as The List Item Marker:</h4>

The list-style-image property specifies an image as the list item marker:

Example:

```
ul {
    list-style-image: url('sqpurple.gif');
}
```

<h4>Position The List Item Markers:</h4>

The list-style-position property specifies whether the list-item markers should appear inside or outside the content flow:

Example:

```
ul {
    list-style-position: inside;
}
```

<h4>Remove Default Settings:</h4>

The list-style-type:none property can also be used to remove the markers/bullets. Note that the list also has default margin and padding. To remove this, add margin:0 and padding:0 to <ul> or <ol>:

Example:

```
ul {
    list-style-type: none;
    margin: 0;
    padding: 0;
}
```

<h4>List - Shorthand property:</h4>

The list-style property is a shorthand property. It is used to set all the list properties in one declaration:

Example:

```
ul {
    list-style: square inside url("sqpurple.gif");
}
```

When using the shorthand property, the order of the property values are:

<b>list-style-type</b> (if a list-style-image is specified, the value of this property will be displayed if the image for some reason cannot be displayed)
<b>list-style-position</b> (specifies whether the list-item markers should appear inside or outside the content flow)
<b>list-style-image</b> (specifies an image as the list item marker)
If one of the property values above are missing, the default value for the missing property will be inserted, if any.

<h4>Styling List With Colors:</h4>

We can also style lists with colors, to make them look a little more interesting.

Anything added to the <ol> or <ul> tag, affects the entire list, while properties added to the <li> tag will affect the individual list items:

Example:

```
ol {
    background: #ff9999;
    padding: 20px;
}

ul {
    background: #3399ff;
    padding: 20px;
}

ol li {
    background: #ffe5e5;
    padding: 5px;
    margin-left: 35px;
}

ul li {
    background: #cce5ff;
    margin: 5px;
}
```

All CSS List Properties

<b>list-style:</b>	Sets all the properties for a list in one declaration
<b>list-style-image:</b>	Specifies an image as the list-item marker
<b>list-style-position:</b>	Specifies if the list-item markers should appear inside or outside the content flow
<b>list-style-type:</b>	Specifies the type of list-item marker

-----

<h3>CSS Syntax:</h3>

CSS rules have three main elements:

<b>Selector:</b> (paragraph, for example)
<b>Declaration: Property</b> (color)
<b>Declaration: Value</b> (red)

Now that you've selected your target, now you can start to change it.

Pay attention to the child and parent relationships described here.

<h3>Cascade:</h3>

Browsers read style rules in a hierarchy, hence the cascade. We can think of the order in terms of origin and scope. The browser will look for the origin of a style rule, and apply the rules in the following, in order of authority or importance:

Inline style (a style declaration written into a tag
Page (CSS rules written into the head of a particular page)
External style sheet (what we'll be working with)
Review this page for information on cascades.

Let's say your external style sheet declares that all <p> be 12-point Helvetica. All the paragraphs on the site would be 12-point Helvetica. We could, however, go into an FAQ page, for example, and write a rule at the top of the page that all the <p> on that page be 10-point Arial. The browser would see the rule on the page and override the external style sheet, though only for that page. Going a step further, maybe one of the FAQs is why you shouldn't use the Playbill font on a page, and we could write our answer in Playbill. We would define a style for that particular paragraph, which would override the Arial rule and present the paragraph in the awful Playbill font.

Rules also cascade by scope: the more specific the rule, the more authority it has. Let's say all <p> to be red and all <li> to be blue, and all <li> <p> (a paragraph inside a list) to be yellow. Because the yellow rule is more specific, even though the broader rules call for red or blue, the paragraph inside the list will be yellow.

Sometimes these cascades can get quite complicated (see this for an example (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. of how browsers calculate authority, not to memorize, but just to get your mind blown), giving you unexpected results. Fortunately, many coding apps give you live previews of what your CSS is doing, and you can also open the developer tools in many browsers where you can sniff out why a rule isn't working the way you expected. The projects we do in this class ought not get so complicated as to stump you, but call to mind the cascade effect if you are trying to track down a problem.
