What you'll need to know about CSS Positioning
Box Model
Browsers process elements as a stackable series of boxes, so it's important to know the sizes of those boxes and how to manipulate them. Review this page (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. so that you know the difference between content, padding, borders and margins.

I sometimes find it helpful to use CSS to create a temporary border or background to an element to see how its padding and borders are working. You can also use the Web Inspector on browsers to show you the numerical values of the box components of a selected element.

Positioning types
We can move elements around a page so that they don't appear in their "natural" order, or what's called the normal document flow. Review the types here (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..

Static. Default. Element stays inside the document flow.
Relative. Moves element relative to where it would have been in the document flow. Element remains in the document flow.
Absolute. Removes element from the document flow and places in position relative to nearest parent element with a declared position definition.
Fixed. Removes element from the document flow and places it in position relative to the screen.
Static and Relative Positioning



Absolute and Fixed Positioning



Floating Elements
Once we start moving elements out of the document flow, we can move them around the page relative to each other. Remember the clearfix hack (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site., which you may need to implement if your results go awry.




CSS Box Model
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The CSS Box Model
All HTML elements can be considered as boxes. In CSS, the term "box model" is used when talking about design and layout.

The CSS box model is essentially a box that wraps around every HTML element. It consists of: margins, borders, padding, and the actual content. The image below illustrates the box model:

Explanation of the different parts:

Content - The content of the box, where text and images appear
Padding - Clears an area around the content. The padding is transparent
Border - A border that goes around the padding and content
Margin - Clears an area outside the border. The margin is transparent
The box model allows us to add a border around elements, and to define space between elements.

Example
div {
    width: 300px;
    border: 25px solid green;
    padding: 25px;
    margin: 25px;
}
Try it Yourself »

Width and Height of an Element
In order to set the width and height of an element correctly in all browsers, you need to know how the box model works.

Important: When you set the width and height properties of an element with CSS, you just set the width and height of the content area. To calculate the full size of an element, you must also add padding, borders and margins.

Assume we want to style a <div> element to have a total width of 350px:

Example
div {
    width: 320px;
    padding: 10px;
    border: 5px solid gray;
    margin: 0;
}
Try it Yourself »
Here is the math:
320px (width)
+ 20px (left + right padding)
+ 10px (left + right border)
+ 0px (left + right margin)
= 350px
The total width of an element should be calculated like this:

Total element width = width + left padding + right padding + left border + right border + left margin + right margin

The total height of an element should be calculated like this:

Total element height = height + top padding + bottom padding + top border + bottom border + top margin + bottom margin




CSS Layout - The position Property
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The position property specifies the type of positioning method used for an element (static, relative, fixed or absolute).

The position Property
The position property specifies the type of positioning method used for an element.

There are four different position values:

static
relative
fixed
absolute
Elements are then positioned using the top, bottom, left, and right properties. However, these properties will not work unless the position property is set first. They also work differently depending on the position value.

position: static;
HTML elements are positioned static by default.

Static positioned elements are not affected by the top, bottom, left, and right properties.

An element with position: static; is not positioned in any special way; it is always positioned according to the normal flow of the page:

This <div> element has position: static;
Here is the CSS that is used:

Example
div.static {
    position: static;
    border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}
Try it Yourself »
position: relative;
An element with position: relative; is positioned relative to its normal position.

Setting the top, right, bottom, and left properties of a relatively-positioned element will cause it to be adjusted away from its normal position. Other content will not be adjusted to fit into any gap left by the element.

This <div> element has position: relative;
Here is the CSS that is used:

Example
div.relative {
    position: relative;
    left: 30px;
    border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}
Try it Yourself »

position: fixed;
An element with position: fixed; is positioned relative to the viewport, which means it always stays in the same place even if the page is scrolled. The top, right, bottom, and left properties are used to position the element.

A fixed element does not leave a gap in the page where it would normally have been located.

Notice the fixed element in the lower-right corner of the page. Here is the CSS that is used:

Example
div.fixed {
    position: fixed;
    bottom: 0;
    right: 0;
    width: 300px;
    border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}
Try it Yourself »
This <div> element has position: fixed;
position: absolute;
An element with position: absolute; is positioned relative to the nearest positioned ancestor (instead of positioned relative to the viewport, like fixed).

However; if an absolute positioned element has no positioned ancestors, it uses the document body, and moves along with page scrolling.

Note: A "positioned" element is one whose position is anything except static.

Here is a simple example:

This <div> element has position: relative; This <div> element has position: absolute;
Here is the CSS that is used:

Example
div.relative {
    position: relative;
    width: 400px;
    height: 200px;
    border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}

div.absolute {
    position: absolute;
    top: 80px;
    right: 0;
    width: 200px;
    height: 100px;
    border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}
Try it Yourself »
Overlapping Elements
When elements are positioned, they can overlap other elements.

The z-index property specifies the stack order of an element (which element should be placed in front of, or behind, the others).

An element can have a positive or negative stack order:

This is a headingBecause the image has a z-index of -1, it will be placed behind the text.
Example
img {
    position: absolute;
    left: 0px;
    top: 0px;
    z-index: -1;
}
Try it Yourself »
An element with greater stack order is always in front of an element with a lower stack order.

Note: If two positioned elements overlap without a z-index specified, the element positioned last in the HTML code will be shown on top.

Positioning Text In an Image
How to position text over an image:

All CSS Positioning Properties
Property	Description
bottom	Sets the bottom margin edge for a positioned box
clip	Clips an absolutely positioned element
left	Sets the left margin edge for a positioned box
position	Specifies the type of positioning for an element
right	Sets the right margin edge for a positioned box
top	Sets the top margin edge for a positioned box
z-index	Sets the stack order of an element

CSS Layout - float and clear
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The float property specifies whether or not an element should float.

The clear property is used to control the behavior of floating elements.



The float Property
In its simplest use, the float property can be used to wrap text around images.

The following example specifies that an image should float to the right in a text:

Example
img {
    float: right;
    margin: 0 0 10px 10px;
}
Try it Yourself »
The clear Property
The clear property is used to control the behavior of floating elements.

Elements after a floating element will flow around it. To avoid this, use the clear property.

The clear property specifies on which sides of an element floating elements are not allowed to float:

Example
div {
    clear: left;
}
Try it Yourself »

The clearfix Hack
If an element is taller than the element containing it, and it is floated, it will overflow outside of its container.

Then we can add overflow: auto; to the containing element to fix this problem:

Example
.clearfix {
    overflow: auto;
}
Try it Yourself »
The overflow:auto clearfix works well as long as you are able to keep control of your margins and padding (else you might see scrollbars). The new, modern clearfix hack however, is safer to use, and the following code is used for most webpages:

Example
.clearfix::after {
    content: "";
    clear: both;
    display: table;
}
Try it Yourself »
You will learn more about the ::after pseudo-element in a later chapter.

Web Layout Example
It is common to do entire web layouts using the float property:


Example
.header, .footer {
    background-color: grey;
    color: white;
    padding: 15px;
}

.column {
    float: left;
    padding: 15px;
}

.clearfix::after {
    content: "";
    clear: both;
    display: table;
}

.menu {
    width: 25%;
}

.content {
    width: 75%;
}
Try it Yourself »
More Examples
An image with border and margins that floats to the right in a paragraph
Let an image float to the right in a paragraph. Add border and margins to the image.

An image with a caption that floats to the right
Let an image with a caption float to the right.

Let the first letter of a paragraph float to the left
Let the first letter of a paragraph float to the left and style the letter.

Creating a horizontal menu
Use float with a list of hyperlinks to create a horizontal menu.

Creating a homepage without tables
Use float to create a homepage with a navbar, header, footer, left content and main content.

All CSS Float Properties
Property	Description
clear	Specifies on which sides of an element where floating elements are not allowed to float
float	Specifies whether or not an element should float
overflow	Specifies what happens if content overflows an element's box
overflow-x	Specifies what to do with the left/right edges of the content if it overflows the element's content area
overflow-y	Specifies what to do with the top/bottom edges of the content if it overflows the element's content area








An Addendum (TO VIDEO)

Although, as you can see, the CSS works with this file, I discovered after making this that if the main div didn't have a lot of content, the width of the main cell shrunk so that it left the right side of the page empty. To remedy this, I added a <div id="main_wrapper"> above the main nav and closed it before the footer (this I added to the cut-and-paste code you can use). I then added the following CSS to that wrapper:

#main_wrapper {
 display: table-row;
 width: 100%;
}
This defines the elements inside it as cells inside that table, and its width should take up 100% of the space allowed it. I then changed the CSS for the main nav as follows:

#main_nav {
/ * float: left; * /
 width: 150px;
/ * display: table-cell; * /
}
You can see that I disabled the table-cell and the left float. The reason is that the float was no longer needed because the nav functioned as the first cell in the table row. Also, floating added a whole heap of padding above the nav that pushed it away from the top of the page. I turned off the table-cell because CSS will only set the width of cells by percentage, but I didn't want the menu to collapse if someone shrunk their browser window too much, so I want an unchanging pixel width. I found that because the nave is contained in the table-row wrapper, it functions as a table cell anyway, and (by not actually defining it as such) I can set an absolute width to it.

Finally, I set the main section like this:

main {
 display: table-cell;
 width: 100%;
}
The difference is that I tell it to extend all the way from the edge of the main nav (150 pixels in) to the right margin of the body (which is set 7.5% from the edge of the screen). This solves the problem of collapsing content when the articles on the page aren't full.
