<h1>What You'll Need To Know About Dynamic Content With PHP:</h1>

Relationship to HTML

PHP is a server-side script that outputs HTML, CSS and JavaScript code (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. on the fly before the server sends the final HTML to your browser. It is useful in crafting unique pages that change depending on the visitor, the time, the visitor's location, and a host of other variables. We call PHP-generated pages dynamic, because they can change every time they are requested from the server. The end user never sees the PHP code (though can see that they're accessing a php file) because the PHP server only sends them the final result after it has brewed the HTML code.







Setting Variables

PHP works by processing arguments that we make with a set of data, so we need a way to identify and move that data around so we can compare, manipulate and output it. Review the following articles on PHP data:

PHP syntax (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
Variables (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
Comparing data with operators (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Note the difference between = (which assigns a value to a variable) and == (which compares two variables without changing them).
The if statement (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. We can test a variable (using the ==, for example) and output some HTML as a result.


Outputting Variables

We need to turn our PHP variables into actionable information.

Echo and print (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. This is how we create HTML on the fly. Of the two, echo is probably what you'll use the most, though they're very similar.
Handling Forms

If we're going to create customized pages for our visitors, often we need to get some information from them so we can respond in a useful way. Forms are a common way of gathering such information. We've made a form already, but now we need to read the data that was in that form, which we do by (most commonly) accessing the POST data (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..

Including Files

Because PHP creates the HTML only when it is requested, we can store HTML snippets that can be retrieved by all sorts of pages, meaning that PHP can create a system of templates where we only have to create a single header or nav bar, for example, and then inject that code into pages as they're generated. It's done through the include (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. command.

-------------
PHP 5 Introduction
❮ PreviousNext ❯
PHP scripts are executed on the server.

What You Should Already Know
Before you continue you should have a basic understanding of the following:

HTML
CSS
JavaScript
If you want to study these subjects first, find the tutorials on our Home page.

What is PHP?
PHP is an acronym for "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor"
PHP is a widely-used, open source scripting language
PHP scripts are executed on the server
PHP is free to download and use
PHP is an amazing and popular language!

It is powerful enough to be at the core of the biggest blogging system on the web (WordPress)!
It is deep enough to run the largest social network (Facebook)!
It is also easy enough to be a beginner's first server side language!

What is a PHP File?
PHP files can contain text, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and PHP code
PHP code are executed on the server, and the result is returned to the browser as plain HTML
PHP files have extension ".php"
What Can PHP Do?
PHP can generate dynamic page content
PHP can create, open, read, write, delete, and close files on the server
PHP can collect form data
PHP can send and receive cookies
PHP can add, delete, modify data in your database
PHP can be used to control user-access
PHP can encrypt data
With PHP you are not limited to output HTML. You can output images, PDF files, and even Flash movies. You can also output any text, such as XHTML and XML.

Why PHP?
PHP runs on various platforms (Windows, Linux, Unix, Mac OS X, etc.)
PHP is compatible with almost all servers used today (Apache, IIS, etc.)
PHP supports a wide range of databases
PHP is free. Download it from the official PHP resource: www.php.net
PHP is easy to learn and runs efficiently on the server side

-----------------
PHP 5 Syntax
❮ PreviousNext ❯
A PHP script is executed on the server, and the plain HTML result is sent back to the browser.

Basic PHP Syntax
A PHP script can be placed anywhere in the document.

A PHP script starts with <?php and ends with ?>:

<?php
// PHP code goes here
?>
The default file extension for PHP files is ".php".

A PHP file normally contains HTML tags, and some PHP scripting code.

Below, we have an example of a simple PHP file, with a PHP script that uses a built-in PHP function "echo" to output the text "Hello World!" on a web page:

Example
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>

<h1>My first PHP page</h1>

<?php
echo "Hello World!";
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
Note: PHP statements end with a semicolon (;).


Comments in PHP
A comment in PHP code is a line that is not read/executed as part of the program. Its only purpose is to be read by someone who is looking at the code.

Comments can be used to:

Let others understand what you are doing
Remind yourself of what you did - Most programmers have experienced coming back to their own work a year or two later and having to re-figure out what they did. Comments can remind you of what you were thinking when you wrote the code
PHP supports several ways of commenting:

Example
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>

<?php
// This is a single-line comment

# This is also a single-line comment

/ *
This is a multiple-lines comment block
that spans over multiple
lines
* /

// You can also use comments to leave out parts of a code line
$x = 5 / * + 15 * / + 5;
echo $x;
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
PHP Case Sensitivity
In PHP, all keywords (e.g. if, else, while, echo, etc.), classes, functions, and user-defined functions are NOT case-sensitive.

In the example below, all three echo statements below are legal (and equal):

Example
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>

<?php
ECHO "Hello World!<br>";
echo "Hello World!<br>";
EcHo "Hello World!<br>";
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
However; all variable names are case-sensitive.

In the example below, only the first statement will display the value of the $color variable (this is because $color, $COLOR, and $coLOR are treated as three different variables):

Example
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>

<?php
$color = "red";
echo "My car is " . $color . "<br>";
echo "My house is " . $COLOR . "<br>";
echo "My boat is " . $coLOR . "<br>";
?>

</body>
</html>
----------
PHP 5 Variables
❮ PreviousNext ❯
Variables are "containers" for storing information.

Creating (Declaring) PHP Variables
In PHP, a variable starts with the $ sign, followed by the name of the variable:

Example
<?php
$txt = "Hello world!";
$x = 5;
$y = 10.5;
?>
Run example »
After the execution of the statements above, the variable $txt will hold the value Hello world!, the variable $x will hold the value 5, and the variable $y will hold the value 10.5.

Note: When you assign a text value to a variable, put quotes around the value.

Note: Unlike other programming languages, PHP has no command for declaring a variable. It is created the moment you first assign a value to it.

Think of variables as containers for storing data.

PHP Variables
A variable can have a short name (like x and y) or a more descriptive name (age, carname, total_volume).

Rules for PHP variables:

A variable starts with the $ sign, followed by the name of the variable
A variable name must start with a letter or the underscore character
A variable name cannot start with a number
A variable name can only contain alpha-numeric characters and underscores (A-z, 0-9, and _ )
Variable names are case-sensitive ($age and $AGE are two different variables)
Remember that PHP variable names are case-sensitive!


Output Variables
The PHP echo statement is often used to output data to the screen.

The following example will show how to output text and a variable:

Example
<?php
$txt = "W3Schools.com";
echo "I love $txt!";
?>
Run example »
The following example will produce the same output as the example above:

Example
<?php
$txt = "W3Schools.com";
echo "I love " . $txt . "!";
?>
Run example »
The following example will output the sum of two variables:

Example
<?php
$x = 5;
$y = 4;
echo $x + $y;
?>
Run example »
Note: You will learn more about the echo statement and how to output data to the screen in the next chapter.

PHP is a Loosely Typed Language
In the example above, notice that we did not have to tell PHP which data type the variable is.

PHP automatically converts the variable to the correct data type, depending on its value.

In other languages such as C, C++, and Java, the programmer must declare the name and type of the variable before using it.

PHP Variables Scope
In PHP, variables can be declared anywhere in the script.

The scope of a variable is the part of the script where the variable can be referenced/used.

PHP has three different variable scopes:

local
global
static
Global and Local Scope
A variable declared outside a function has a GLOBAL SCOPE and can only be accessed outside a function:

Example
<?php
$x = 5; // global scope

function myTest() {
    // using x inside this function will generate an error
    echo "<p>Variable x inside function is: $x</p>";
}
myTest();

echo "<p>Variable x outside function is: $x</p>";
?>
Run example »
A variable declared within a function has a LOCAL SCOPE and can only be accessed within that function:

Example
<?php
function myTest() {
    $x = 5; // local scope
    echo "<p>Variable x inside function is: $x</p>";
}
myTest();

// using x outside the function will generate an error
echo "<p>Variable x outside function is: $x</p>";
?>
Run example »
You can have local variables with the same name in different functions, because local variables are only recognized by the function in which they are declared.

PHP The global Keyword
The global keyword is used to access a global variable from within a function.

To do this, use the global keyword before the variables (inside the function):

Example
<?php
$x = 5;
$y = 10;

function myTest() {
    global $x, $y;
    $y = $x + $y;
}

myTest();
echo $y; // outputs 15
?>
Run example »
PHP also stores all global variables in an array called $GLOBALS[index]. The index holds the name of the variable. This array is also accessible from within functions and can be used to update global variables directly.

The example above can be rewritten like this:

Example
<?php
$x = 5;
$y = 10;

function myTest() {
    $GLOBALS['y'] = $GLOBALS['x'] + $GLOBALS['y'];
}

myTest();
echo $y; // outputs 15
?>
Run example »
PHP The static Keyword
Normally, when a function is completed/executed, all of its variables are deleted. However, sometimes we want a local variable NOT to be deleted. We need it for a further job.

To do this, use the static keyword when you first declare the variable:

Example
<?php
function myTest() {
    static $x = 0;
    echo $x;
    $x++;
}

myTest();
myTest();
myTest();
?>
Run example »
Then, each time the function is called, that variable will still have the information it contained from the last time the function was called.

Note: The variable is still local to the function.
-----------


PHP 5 Operators
❮ PreviousNext ❯
PHP Operators
Operators are used to perform operations on variables and values.

PHP divides the operators in the following groups:

Arithmetic operators
Assignment operators
Comparison operators
Increment/Decrement operators
Logical operators
String operators
Array operators
PHP Arithmetic Operators
The PHP arithmetic operators are used with numeric values to perform common arithmetical operations, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication etc.

Operator	Name	Example	Result	Show it
+	Addition	$x + $y	Sum of $x and $y	Show it »
-	Subtraction	$x - $y	Difference of $x and $y	Show it »
*	Multiplication	$x * $y	Product of $x and $y	Show it »
/	Division	$x / $y	Quotient of $x and $y	Show it »
%	Modulus	$x % $y	Remainder of $x divided by $y	Show it »
**	Exponentiation	$x ** $y	Result of raising $x to the $y'th power (Introduced in PHP 5.6)	 
PHP Assignment Operators
The PHP assignment operators are used with numeric values to write a value to a variable.

The basic assignment operator in PHP is "=". It means that the left operand gets set to the value of the assignment expression on the right.

Assignment	Same as...	Description	Show it
x = y	x = y	The left operand gets set to the value of the expression on the right	Show it »
x += y	x = x + y	Addition	Show it »
x -= y	x = x - y	Subtraction	Show it »
x * = y	x = x * y	Multiplication	Show it »
x /= y	x = x / y	Division	Show it »
x %= y	x = x % y	Modulus	Show it »

PHP Comparison Operators
The PHP comparison operators are used to compare two values (number or string):

Operator	Name	Example	Result	Show it
==	Equal	$x == $y	Returns true if $x is equal to $y	Show it »
===	Identical	$x === $y	Returns true if $x is equal to $y, and they are of the same type	Show it »
!=	Not equal	$x != $y	Returns true if $x is not equal to $y	Show it »
<>	Not equal	$x <> $y	Returns true if $x is not equal to $y	Show it »
!==	Not identical	$x !== $y	Returns true if $x is not equal to $y, or they are not of the same type	Show it »
>	Greater than	$x > $y	Returns true if $x is greater than $y	Show it »
<	Less than	$x < $y	Returns true if $x is less than $y	Show it »
>=	Greater than or equal to	$x >= $y	Returns true if $x is greater than or equal to $y	Show it »
<=	Less than or equal to	$x <= $y	Returns true if $x is less than or equal to $y	Show it »
PHP Increment / Decrement Operators
The PHP increment operators are used to increment a variable's value.

The PHP decrement operators are used to decrement a variable's value.

Operator	Name	Description	Show it
++$x	Pre-increment	Increments $x by one, then returns $x	Show it »
$x++	Post-increment	Returns $x, then increments $x by one	Show it »
--$x	Pre-decrement	Decrements $x by one, then returns $x	Show it »
$x--	Post-decrement	Returns $x, then decrements $x by one	Show it »
PHP Logical Operators
The PHP logical operators are used to combine conditional statements.

Operator	Name	Example	Result	Show it
and	And	$x and $y	True if both $x and $y are true	Show it »
or	Or	$x or $y	True if either $x or $y is true	Show it »
xor	Xor	$x xor $y	True if either $x or $y is true, but not both	Show it »
&&	And	$x && $y	True if both $x and $y are true	Show it »
||	Or	$x || $y	True if either $x or $y is true	Show it »
!	Not	!$x	True if $x is not true	Show it »
PHP String Operators
PHP has two operators that are specially designed for strings.

Operator	Name	Example	Result	Show it
.	Concatenation	$txt1 . $txt2	Concatenation of $txt1 and $txt2	Show it »
.=	Concatenation assignment	$txt1 .= $txt2	Appends $txt2 to $txt1	Show it »
PHP Array Operators
The PHP array operators are used to compare arrays.

Operator	Name	Example	Result	Show it
+	Union	$x + $y	Union of $x and $y	Show it »
==	Equality	$x == $y	Returns true if $x and $y have the same key/value pairs	Show it »
===	Identity	$x === $y	Returns true if $x and $y have the same key/value pairs in the same order and of the same types	Show it »
!=	Inequality	$x != $y	Returns true if $x is not equal to $y	Show it »
<>	Inequality	$x <> $y	Returns true if $x is not equal to $y	Show it »
!==	Non-identity	$x !== $y	Returns true if $x is not identical to $y

-----------
PHP 5 if...else...elseif Statements
❮ PreviousNext ❯
Conditional statements are used to perform different actions based on different conditions.

PHP Conditional Statements
Very often when you write code, you want to perform different actions for different conditions. You can use conditional statements in your code to do this.

In PHP we have the following conditional statements:

if statement - executes some code if one condition is true
if...else statement - executes some code if a condition is true and another code if that condition is false
if...elseif....else statement - executes different codes for more than two conditions
switch statement - selects one of many blocks of code to be executed
PHP - The if Statement
The if statement executes some code if one condition is true.

Syntax
if (condition) {
    code to be executed if condition is true;
}
The example below will output "Have a good day!" if the current time (HOUR) is less than 20:

Example
<?php
$t = date("H");

if ($t < "20") {
    echo "Have a good day!";
}
?>
Run example »

PHP - The if...else Statement
The if....else statement executes some code if a condition is true and another code if that condition is false.

Syntax
if (condition) {
    code to be executed if condition is true;
} else {
    code to be executed if condition is false;
}
The example below will output "Have a good day!" if the current time is less than 20, and "Have a good night!" otherwise:

Example
<?php
$t = date("H");

if ($t < "20") {
    echo "Have a good day!";
} else {
    echo "Have a good night!";
}
?>
Run example »
PHP - The if...elseif....else Statement
The if....elseif...else statement executes different codes for more than two conditions.

Syntax
if (condition) {
    code to be executed if this condition is true;
} elseif (condition) {
    code to be executed if this condition is true;
} else {
    code to be executed if all conditions are false;
}
The example below will output "Have a good morning!" if the current time is less than 10, and "Have a good day!" if the current time is less than 20. Otherwise it will output "Have a good night!":

Example
<?php
$t = date("H");

if ($t < "10") {
    echo "Have a good morning!";
} elseif ($t < "20") {
    echo "Have a good day!";
} else {
    echo "Have a good night!";
}
?>
---------

PHP 5 echo and print Statements
❮ PreviousNext ❯
In PHP there are two basic ways to get output: echo and print.

In this tutorial we use echo (and print) in almost every example. So, this chapter contains a little more info about those two output statements.

PHP echo and print Statements
echo and print are more or less the same. They are both used to output data to the screen.

The differences are small: echo has no return value while print has a return value of 1 so it can be used in expressions. echo can take multiple parameters (although such usage is rare) while print can take one argument. echo is marginally faster than print.

The PHP echo Statement
The echo statement can be used with or without parentheses: echo or echo().

Display Text

The following example shows how to output text with the echo command (notice that the text can contain HTML markup):

Example
<?php
echo "<h2>PHP is Fun!</h2>";
echo "Hello world!<br>";
echo "I'm about to learn PHP!<br>";
echo "This ", "string ", "was ", "made ", "with multiple parameters.";
?>
Run example »
Display Variables

The following example shows how to output text and variables with the echo statement:

Example
<?php
$txt1 = "Learn PHP";
$txt2 = "W3Schools.com";
$x = 5;
$y = 4;

echo "<h2>$txt1</h2>";
echo "Study PHP at $txt2<br>";
echo $x + $y;
?>
Run example »

The PHP print Statement
The print statement can be used with or without parentheses: print or print().

Display Text

The following example shows how to output text with the print command (notice that the text can contain HTML markup):

Example
<?php
print "<h2>PHP is Fun!</h2>";
print "Hello world!<br>";
print "I'm about to learn PHP!";
?>
Run example »
Display Variables

The following example shows how to output text and variables with the print statement:

Example
<?php
$txt1 = "Learn PHP";
$txt2 = "W3Schools.com";
$x = 5;
$y = 4;

print "<h2>$txt1</h2>";
print "Study PHP at $txt2<br>";
print $x + $y;
?>

--------


PHP 5 Form Handling
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The PHP superglobals $_ GET and $_ POST are used to collect form-data.

PHP - A Simple HTML Form
The example below displays a simple HTML form with two input fields and a submit button:

Example
<html>
<body>

<form action="welcome.php" method="post">
Name: <input type="text" name="name"><br>
E-mail: <input type="text" name="email"><br>
<input type="submit">
</form>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
When the user fills out the form above and clicks the submit button, the form data is sent for processing to a PHP file named "welcome.php". The form data is sent with the HTTP POST method.

To display the submitted data you could simply echo all the variables. The "welcome.php" looks like this:

<html>
<body>

Welcome <?php echo $_ POST["name"]; ?><br>
Your email address is: <?php echo $_ POST["email"]; ?>

</body>
</html>
The output could be something like this:

Welcome John
Your email address is john.doe@example.com
The same result could also be achieved using the HTTP GET method:

Example
<html>
<body>

<form action="welcome_get.php" method="get">
Name: <input type="text" name="name"><br>
E-mail: <input type="text" name="email"><br>
<input type="submit">
</form>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
and "welcome_get.php" looks like this:

<html>
<body>

Welcome <?php echo $_ GET["name"]; ?><br>
Your email address is: <?php echo $_ GET["email"]; ?>

</body>
</html>
The code above is quite simple. However, the most important thing is missing. You need to validate form data to protect your script from malicious code.

Think SECURITY when processing PHP forms!

This page does not contain any form validation, it just shows how you can send and retrieve form data.

However, the next pages will show how to process PHP forms with security in mind! Proper validation of form data is important to protect your form from hackers and spammers!


GET vs. POST
Both GET and POST create an array (e.g. array( key => value, key2 => value2, key3 => value3, ...)). This array holds key/value pairs, where keys are the names of the form controls and values are the input data from the user.

Both GET and POST are treated as $_ GET and $_ POST. These are superglobals, which means that they are always accessible, regardless of scope - and you can access them from any function, class or file without having to do anything special.

$_ GET is an array of variables passed to the current script via the URL parameters.

$_ POST is an array of variables passed to the current script via the HTTP POST method.

When to use GET?
Information sent from a form with the GET method is visible to everyone (all variable names and values are displayed in the URL). GET also has limits on the amount of information to send. The limitation is about 2000 characters. However, because the variables are displayed in the URL, it is possible to bookmark the page. This can be useful in some cases.

GET may be used for sending non-sensitive data.

Note: GET should NEVER be used for sending passwords or other sensitive information!

When to use POST?
Information sent from a form with the POST method is invisible to others (all names/values are embedded within the body of the HTTP request) and has no limits on the amount of information to send.

Moreover POST supports advanced functionality such as support for multi-part binary input while uploading files to server.

However, because the variables are not displayed in the URL, it is not possible to bookmark the page.

Developers prefer POST for sending form data.

Next, lets see how we can process PHP forms the secure way!


-------

PHP 5 Include Files
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The include (or require) statement takes all the text/code/markup that exists in the specified file and copies it into the file that uses the include statement.

Including files is very useful when you want to include the same PHP, HTML, or text on multiple pages of a website.

PHP include and require Statements
It is possible to insert the content of one PHP file into another PHP file (before the server executes it), with the include or require statement.

The include and require statements are identical, except upon failure:

require will produce a fatal error (E_COMPILE_ERROR) and stop the script
include will only produce a warning (E_WARNING) and the script will continue
So, if you want the execution to go on and show users the output, even if the include file is missing, use the include statement. Otherwise, in case of FrameWork, CMS, or a complex PHP application coding, always use the require statement to include a key file to the flow of execution. This will help avoid compromising your application's security and integrity, just in-case one key file is accidentally missing.

Including files saves a lot of work. This means that you can create a standard header, footer, or menu file for all your web pages. Then, when the header needs to be updated, you can only update the header include file.

Syntax
include 'filename';

or

require 'filename';
PHP include Examples
Example 1
Assume we have a standard footer file called "footer.php", that looks like this:

<?php
echo "<p>Copyright &copy; 1999-" . date("Y") . " W3Schools.com</p>";
?>
To include the footer file in a page, use the include statement:

Example
<html>
<body>

<h1>Welcome to my home page!</h1>
<p>Some text.</p>
<p>Some more text.</p>
<?php include 'footer.php';?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »

Example 2
Assume we have a standard menu file called "menu.php":

<?php
echo '<a href="/default.asp">Home</a> -
<a href="/html/default.asp">HTML Tutorial</a> -
<a href="/css/default.asp">CSS Tutorial</a> -
<a href="/js/default.asp">JavaScript Tutorial</a> -
<a href="default.asp">PHP Tutorial</a>';
?>
All pages in the Web site should use this menu file. Here is how it can be done (we are using a <div> element so that the menu easily can be styled with CSS later):

Example
<html>
<body>

<div class="menu">
<?php include 'menu.php';?>
</div>

<h1>Welcome to my home page!</h1>
<p>Some text.</p>
<p>Some more text.</p>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
Example 3
Assume we have a file called "vars.php", with some variables defined:

<?php
$color='red';
$car='BMW';
?>
Then, if we include the "vars.php" file, the variables can be used in the calling file:

Example
<html>
<body>

<h1>Welcome to my home page!</h1>
<?php include 'vars.php';
echo "I have a $color $car.";
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
PHP include vs. require
The require statement is also used to include a file into the PHP code.

However, there is one big difference between include and require; when a file is included with the include statement and PHP cannot find it, the script will continue to execute:

Example
<html>
<body>

<h1>Welcome to my home page!</h1>
<?php include 'noFileExists.php';
echo "I have a $color $car.";
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
If we do the same example using the require statement, the echo statement will not be executed because the script execution dies after the require statement returned a fatal error:

Example
<html>
<body>

<h1>Welcome to my home page!</h1>
<?php require 'noFileExists.php';
echo "I have a $color $car.";
?>

</body>
</html>
Run example »
Use require when the file is required by the application.

Use include when the file is not required and application should continue when file is not found.

--------
