What you'll be doing with Dynamic Content with PHP
Retrieve form data
Create a form that, when the submit button is pressed, sends the form data to a new PHP page that retrieves the data and displays it on the page. You will need to add an attribute to the form element that specifies the post method as well as the action, which is the address of the page you'll be unpacking the information in.

Get date information
Using PHP, add the current day and time in a paragraph in the following format: It is 9:45 am EDT on Monday, January 23, 2015.

Inject template content
While this isn't strictly CSS, we're doing the same thing as we do when we link to a CSS file – we can gather common data or content from other pages and use it on as many pages as we like. For example, most sites have a menu and header that are consistent on all pages across the site. Rather than having to reproduce that on each page, something that can be cumbersome as the site gets more complex, we can create a HTML file that has just the header or the menu, then import that content with a single line on every page. If we make a change to the template HTML file, we'll see the change immediately across the site.

Create a folder called templates or scripts (whatever your preference) and create a PHP file inside it called main_menu.php. In the menu, create the HTML for an unordered list of links to the pages or sections of the site. Using PHP, include that script in your nav section.

Testing
You'll need to put your PHP page up on your server to test it; previewing on your local machine probably won't work (unless you have it configured to output PHP, which is possible but beyond the scope of this assignment). Alternatively, you can test it at PhpFiddle (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site., which will show you where any errors are occurring and let you fine tune your code and show you the output immediately.
