<h1>What You'll Need To Know About SQL Databases:</h1>

Relational data
The most important concept to master to make the most of databases is how they use multiple tables to efficiently store data without unnecessary duplication. Data in one table is related to data in another through use of keys (numbers). For example, if I were creating a list of communication students and their concentrations I could make a list like this that stores their name and concentration:

Steve. PR.
Allie. Digital.
Suzie. Digital.
Fred. PR.
and so on. But you see that the content in the concentration field is duplicated. For a short database like this, it wouldn't be a good deal, but when we get larger sets of data, it is inefficient. Instead, I'd create two databases.

Concentration List

PR
Digital
Other
Then a list of students where I store the id number of the concentration that they're in. So:

Student List

Steve. 1. (The 1 comes from the record number of PR in the concentration list.)
Allie. 2.
Suzie. 2.
Fred. 1.
Here's a video that shows the idea:



This article (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. is a bit more complex, but worth digesting. Start in the third paragraph of the Integrity Rules section, and read down to the Transactions section. You'll be doing queries and joins in the next module.

Basic SQL language and syntax
This page (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. describes a basic table and introduces you to some common queries (sets of instructions we use to manage data in the database).

Inserting data (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Know the basic syntax, though at this point you can do much of this with the PHPMyAdmin interface.

Data types (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Most will be integers, dates and varchars.

Null (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. values. Use for fields that may not always contain data. (Middle names, for example.)

Primary keys (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and autoincrementing (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. records. In most cases, primary keys will be unique and autoincremented.

Setting up MySQL
You can skip the first few minutes this video, but you can see how MySQL is used to create a couple of basic tables and how you can use it to insert some data.



In most cases, you'll insert data from a web form, not directly into the database like this, but for now by adding some data manually we can start to see how data can be retrieved.

Connecting a form to your database
Here's an example of a script that takes table data and inserts it into a database. It is a bit different than mine, showing that there are quite a few different ways to do the same thing. Find an example that works for you and go with it. One difference, for example, is that he has all of his code on a single page, whereas my example splits the code up into snippets that can be accessed by many different pages.

-----------


Integrity Rules

Relational tables follow certain integrity rules to ensure that the data they contain stay accurate and are always accessible. First, the rows in a relational table should all be distinct. If there are duplicate rows, there can be problems resolving which of two possible selections is the correct one. For most DBMSs, the user can specify that duplicate rows are not allowed, and if that is done, the DBMS will prevent the addition of any rows that duplicate an existing row.

A second integrity rule of the traditional relational model is that column values must not be repeating groups or arrays. A third aspect of data integrity involves the concept of a null value. A database takes care of situations where data may not be available by using a null value to indicate that a value is missing. It does not equate to a blank or zero. A blank is considered equal to another blank, a zero is equal to another zero, but two null values are not considered equal.

When each row in a table is different, it is possible to use one or more columns to identify a particular row. This unique column or group of columns is called a primary key. Any column that is part of a primary key cannot be null; if it were, the primary key containing it would no longer be a complete identifier. This rule is referred to as entity integrity.

The Employees table illustrates some of these relational database concepts. It has five columns and six rows, with each row representing a different employee.


Employees Table
Employee_Number	First_name	Last_Name	Date_of_Birth	Car_Number
10001	John	Washington	28-Aug-43	5
10083	Arvid	Sharma	24-Nov-54	null
10120	Jonas	Ginsberg	01-Jan-69	null
10005	Florence	Wojokowski	04-Jul-71	12
10099	Sean	Washington	21-Sep-66	null
10035	Elizabeth	Yamaguchi	24-Dec-59	null
The primary key for this table would generally be the employee number because each one is guaranteed to be different. (A number is also more efficient than a string for making comparisons.) It would also be possible to use First_Name and Last_Name because the combination of the two also identifies just one row in our sample database. Using the last name alone would not work because there are two employees with the last name of "Washington." In this particular case the first names are all different, so one could conceivably use that column as a primary key, but it is best to avoid using a column where duplicates could occur. If Elizabeth Jones gets a job at this company and the primary key is First_Name, the RDBMS will not allow her name to be added (if it has been specified that no duplicates are permitted). Because there is already an Elizabeth in the table, adding a second one would make the primary key useless as a way of identifying just one row. Note that although using First_Name and Last_Name is a unique composite key for this example, it might not be unique in a larger database. Note also that the Employees table assumes that there can be only one car per employee.

SELECT Statements

SQL is a language designed to be used with relational databases. There is a set of basic SQL commands that is considered standard and is used by all RDBMSs. For example, all RDBMSs use the SELECT statement.

A SELECT statement, also called a query, is used to get information from a table. It specifies one or more column headings, one or more tables from which to select, and some criteria for selection. The RDBMS returns rows of the column entries that satisfy the stated requirements. A SELECT statement such as the following will fetch the first and last names of employees who have company cars:

SELECT First_Name, Last_Name
FROM Employees
WHERE Car_Number IS NOT NULL
The result set (the set of rows that satisfy the requirement of not having null in the Car_Number column) follows. The first name and last name are printed for each row that satisfies the requirement because the SELECT statement (the first line) specifies the columns First_Name and Last_Name. The FROM clause (the second line) gives the table from which the columns will be selected.

FIRST_NAME	LAST_NAME
John	Washington
Florence	Wojokowski
The following code produces a result set that includes the whole table because it asks for all of the columns in the table Employees with no restrictions (no WHERE clause). Note that SELECT * means "SELECT all columns."

SELECT *
FROM Employees
WHERE Clauses

The WHERE clause in a SELECT statement provides the criteria for selecting values. For example, in the following code fragment, values will be selected only if they occur in a row in which the column Last_Name begins with the string 'Washington'.

SELECT First_Name, Last_Name
FROM Employees
WHERE Last_Name LIKE 'Washington%'
The keyword LIKE is used to compare strings, and it offers the feature that patterns containing wildcards can be used. For example, in the code fragment above, there is a percent sign (%) at the end of 'Washington', which signifies that any value containing the string 'Washington' plus zero or more additional characters will satisfy this selection criterion. So 'Washington' or 'Washingtonian' would be matches, but 'Washing' would not be. The other wildcard used in LIKE clauses is an underbar (_ ), which stands for any one character. For example,

WHERE Last_Name LIKE 'Ba_man'
would match 'Barman', 'Badman', 'Balman', 'Bagman', 'Bamman', and so on.

The code fragment below has a WHERE clause that uses the equal sign (=) to compare numbers. It selects the first and last name of the employee who is assigned car 12.

SELECT First_Name, Last_Name
FROM Employees
WHERE Car_Number = 12
The next code fragment selects the first and last names of employees whose employee number is greater than 10005:

SELECT First_Name, Last_Name
FROM Employees
WHERE Employee_Number > 10005
WHERE clauses can get rather elaborate, with multiple conditions and, in some DBMSs, nested conditions. This overview will not cover complicated WHERE clauses, but the following code fragment has a WHERE clause with two conditions; this query selects the first and last names of employees whose employee number is less than 10100 and who do not have a company car.

SELECT First_Name, Last_Name
FROM Employees
WHERE Employee_Number < 10100 and Car_Number IS NULL
A special type of WHERE clause involves a join, which is explained in the next section.

Joins

A distinguishing feature of relational databases is that it is possible to get data from more than one table in what is called a join. Suppose that after retrieving the names of employees who have company cars, one wanted to find out who has which car, including the license plate number, mileage, and year of car. This information is stored in another table, Cars:


Cars Table
Car_Number	License_Plate	Mileage	Year
5	ABC123	5000	1996
12	DEF123	7500	1999
There must be one column that appears in both tables in order to relate them to each other. This column, which must be the primary key in one table, is called the foreign key in the other table. In this case, the column that appears in two tables is Car_Number, which is the primary key for the table Cars and the foreign key in the table Employees. If the 1996 car with license plate number ABC123 were wrecked and deleted from the Cars table, then Car_Number 5 would also have to be removed from the Employees table in order to maintain what is called referential integrity. Otherwise, the foreign key column (Car_Number) in the Employees table would contain an entry that did not refer to anything in the Cars table. A foreign key must either be null or equal to an existing primary key value of the table to which it refers. This is different from a primary key, which may not be null. There are several null values in the Car_Number column in the table Employees because it is possible for an employee not to have a company car.

The following code asks for the first and last names of employees who have company cars and for the license plate number, mileage, and year of those cars. Note that the FROM clause lists both the Employees and Cars tables because the requested data is contained in both tables. Using the table name and a dot (.) before the column name indicates which table contains the column.

SELECT Employees.First_Name, Employees.Last_Name,
    Cars.License_Plate, Cars.Mileage, Cars.Year
FROM Employees, Cars
WHERE Employees.Car_Number = Cars.Car_Number
This returns a result set that will look similar to the following:

FIRST_NAME	LAST_NAME	LICENSE_PLATE	MILEAGE	YEAR
John	Washington	ABC123	5000	1996
Florence	Wojokowski	DEF123	7500	1999
Common SQL Commands

SQL commands are divided into categories, the two main ones being Data Manipulation Language (DML) commands and Data Definition Language (DDL) commands. DML commands deal with data, either retrieving it or modifying it to keep it up-to-date. DDL commands create or change tables and other database objects such as views and indexes.

A list of the more common DML commands follows:

SELECT —  used to query and display data from a database. The SELECT statement specifies which columns to include in the result set. The vast majority of the SQL commands used in applications are SELECT statements.

INSERT —  adds new rows to a table. INSERT is used to populate a newly created table or to add a new row (or rows) to an already-existing table.

DELETE —  removes a specified row or set of rows from a table

UPDATE —  changes an existing value in a column or group of columns in a table

The more common DDL commands follow:

CREATE TABLE —  creates a table with the column names the user provides. The user also needs to specify a type for the data in each column. Data types vary from one RDBMS to another, so a user might need to use metadata to establish the data types used by a particular database. CREATE TABLE is normally used less often than the data manipulation commands because a table is created only once, whereas adding or deleting rows or changing individual values generally occurs more frequently.

DROP TABLE —  deletes all rows and removes the table definition from the database. A JDBC API implementation is required to support the DROP TABLE command as specified by SQL92, Transitional Level. However, support for the CASCADE and RESTRICT options of DROP TABLE is optional. In addition, the behavior of DROP TABLE is implementation-defined when there are views or integrity constraints defined that reference the table being dropped.

ALTER TABLE —  adds or removes a column from a table. It also adds or drops table constraints and alters column attributes

Result Sets and Cursors

The rows that satisfy the conditions of a query are called the result set. The number of rows returned in a result set can be zero, one, or many. A user can access the data in a result set one row at a time, and a cursor provides the means to do that. A cursor can be thought of as a pointer into a file that contains the rows of the result set, and that pointer has the ability to keep track of which row is currently being accessed. A cursor allows a user to process each row of a result set from top to bottom and consequently may be used for iterative processing. Most DBMSs create a cursor automatically when a result set is generated.

Earlier JDBC API versions added new capabilities for a result set's cursor, allowing it to move both forward and backward and also allowing it to move to a specified row or to a row whose position is relative to another row.


-------

SQL Syntax
❮ PreviousNext ❯
Database Tables
A database most often contains one or more tables. Each table is identified by a name (e.g. "Customers" or "Orders"). Tables contain records (rows) with data.

In this tutorial we will use the well-known Northwind sample database (included in MS Access and MS SQL Server).

Below is a selection from the "Customers" table:

CustomerID	CustomerName	ContactName	Address	City	PostalCode	Country
1

Alfreds Futterkiste	Maria Anders	Obere Str. 57	Berlin	12209	Germany
2	Ana Trujillo Emparedados y helados	Ana Trujillo	Avda. de la Constitución 2222	México D.F.	05021	Mexico
3	Antonio Moreno Taquería	Antonio Moreno	Mataderos 2312	México D.F.	05023	Mexico
4

Around the Horn	Thomas Hardy	120 Hanover Sq.	London	WA1 1DP	UK
5	Berglunds snabbköp	Christina Berglund	Berguvsvägen 8	Luleå	S-958 22	Sweden
The table above contains five records (one for each customer) and seven columns (CustomerID, CustomerName, ContactName, Address, City, PostalCode, and Country).

SQL Statements
Most of the actions you need to perform on a database are done with SQL statements.

The following SQL statement selects all the records in the "Customers" table:

Example
SELECT * FROM Customers;
Try it Yourself »
In this tutorial we will teach you all about the different SQL statements.


Keep in Mind That...
SQL keywords are NOT case sensitive: select is the same as SELECT
In this tutorial we will write all SQL keywords in upper-case.

Semicolon after SQL Statements?
Some database systems require a semicolon at the end of each SQL statement.

Semicolon is the standard way to separate each SQL statement in database systems that allow more than one SQL statement to be executed in the same call to the server.

In this tutorial, we will use semicolon at the end of each SQL statement.

Some of The Most Important SQL Commands
SELECT - extracts data from a database
UPDATE - updates data in a database
DELETE - deletes data from a database
INSERT INTO - inserts new data into a database
CREATE DATABASE - creates a new database
ALTER DATABASE - modifies a database
CREATE TABLE - creates a new table
ALTER TABLE - modifies a table
DROP TABLE - deletes a table
CREATE INDEX - creates an index (search key)
DROP INDEX - deletes an index


-------


SQL INSERT INTO Statement
❮ PreviousNext ❯
The SQL INSERT INTO Statement
The INSERT INTO statement is used to insert new records in a table.

INSERT INTO Syntax
It is possible to write the INSERT INTO statement in two ways.

The first way specifies both the column names and the values to be inserted:

INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2, column3, ...)
VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);
If you are adding values for all the columns of the table, you do not need to specify the column names in the SQL query. However, make sure the order of the values is in the same order as the columns in the table. The INSERT INTO syntax would be as follows:

INSERT INTO table_name
VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);
Demo Database
Below is a selection from the "Customers" table in the Northwind sample database:

CustomerID	CustomerName	ContactName	Address	City	PostalCode	Country
89	White Clover Markets	Karl Jablonski	305 - 14th Ave. S. Suite 3B	Seattle	98128	USA
90

Wilman Kala	Matti Karttunen	Keskuskatu 45	Helsinki	21240	Finland
91

Wolski	Zbyszek	ul. Filtrowa 68	Walla	01-012	Poland

INSERT INTO Example
The following SQL statement inserts a new record in the "Customers" table:

Example
INSERT INTO Customers (CustomerName, ContactName, Address, City, PostalCode, Country)
VALUES ('Cardinal', 'Tom B. Erichsen', 'Skagen 21', 'Stavanger', '4006', 'Norway');
Try it Yourself »
The selection from the "Customers" table will now look like this:

CustomerID	CustomerName	ContactName	Address	City	PostalCode	Country
89	White Clover Markets	Karl Jablonski	305 - 14th Ave. S. Suite 3B	Seattle	98128	USA
90

Wilman Kala	Matti Karttunen	Keskuskatu 45	Helsinki	21240	Finland
91

Wolski	Zbyszek	ul. Filtrowa 68	Walla	01-012	Poland
92	Cardinal	Tom B. Erichsen	Skagen 21	Stavanger	4006	Norway
Did you notice that we did not insert any number into the CustomerID field?
The CustomerID column is an auto-increment field and will be generated automatically when a new record is inserted into the table.

Insert Data Only in Specified Columns
It is also possible to only insert data in specific columns.

The following SQL statement will insert a new record, but only insert data in the "CustomerName", "City", and "Country" columns (CustomerID will be updated automatically):

Example
INSERT INTO Customers (CustomerName, City, Country)
VALUES ('Cardinal', 'Stavanger', 'Norway');
Try it Yourself »
The selection from the "Customers" table will now look like this:

CustomerID	CustomerName	ContactName	Address	City	PostalCode	Country
89	White Clover Markets	Karl Jablonski	305 - 14th Ave. S. Suite 3B	Seattle	98128	USA
90

Wilman Kala	Matti Karttunen	Keskuskatu 45	Helsinki	21240	Finland
91

Wolski	Zbyszek	ul. Filtrowa 68	Walla	01-012	Poland
92	Cardinal	null	null 	Stavanger	null	Norway

------------

SQL General Data Types
❮ PreviousNext ❯
A data type defines what kind of value a column can contain.

SQL General Data Types
Each column in a database table is required to have a name and a data type.

SQL developers have to decide what types of data will be stored inside each and every table column when creating a SQL table. The data type is a label and a guideline for SQL to understand what type of data is expected inside of each column, and it also identifies how SQL will interact with the stored data.

The following table lists the general data types in SQL:

Data type	Description
CHARACTER(n)	Character string. Fixed-length n
VARCHAR(n) or
CHARACTER VARYING(n)	Character string. Variable length. Maximum length n
BINARY(n)	Binary string. Fixed-length n
BOOLEAN	Stores TRUE or FALSE values
VARBINARY(n) or
BINARY VARYING(n)	Binary string. Variable length. Maximum length n
INTEGER(p)	Integer numerical (no decimal). Precision p
SMALLINT	Integer numerical (no decimal). Precision 5
INTEGER	Integer numerical (no decimal). Precision 10
BIGINT	Integer numerical (no decimal). Precision 19
DECIMAL(p,s)	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. Example: decimal(5,2) is a number that has 3 digits before the decimal and 2 digits after the decimal
NUMERIC(p,s)	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. (Same as DECIMAL)
FLOAT(p)	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision p. A floating number in base 10 exponential notation. The size argument for this type consists of a single number specifying the minimum precision
REAL	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision 7
FLOAT	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision 16
DOUBLE PRECISION	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision 16
DATE	Stores year, month, and day values
TIME	Stores hour, minute, and second values
TIMESTAMP	Stores year, month, day, hour, minute, and second values
INTERVAL	Composed of a number of integer fields, representing a period of time, depending on the type of interval
ARRAY	A set-length and ordered collection of elements
MULTISET	A variable-length and unordered collection of elements
XML	Stores XML data
SQL Data Type Quick Reference
However, different databases offer different choices for the data type definition.

The following table shows some of the common names of data types between the various database platforms:

Data type	Access	SQLServer	Oracle	MySQL	PostgreSQL
boolean	Yes/No	Bit	Byte	N/A	Boolean
integer	Number (integer)	Int	Number	Int
Integer	Int
Integer
float	Number (single)	Float
Real	Number	Float	Numeric
currency	Currency	Money	N/A	N/A	Money
string (fixed)	N/A	Char	Char	Char	Char
string (variable)	Text (<256)
Memo (65k+)	Varchar	Varchar
Varchar2	Varchar	Varchar
binary object	OLE Object Memo	Binary (fixed up to 8K)
Varbinary (<8K)
Image (<2GB)	Long
Raw	Blob
Text	Binary
Varbinary
Note: Data types might have different names in different database. And even if the name is the same, the size and other details may be different! Always check the documentation!


-----------


SQL NULL Values
❮ PreviousNext ❯
What is a NULL Value?
A field with a NULL value is a field with no value.

If a field in a table is optional, it is possible to insert a new record or update a record without adding a value to this field. Then, the field will be saved with a NULL value.

Note: It is very important to understand that a NULL value is different from a zero value or a field that contains spaces. A field with a NULL value is one that has been left blank during record creation!

How to Test for NULL Values?
It is not possible to test for NULL values with comparison operators, such as =, <, or <>.

We will have to use the IS NULL and IS NOT NULL operators instead.

IS NULL Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name IS NULL;
IS NOT NULL Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name IS NOT NULL;
Demo Database
Assume we have the following "Persons" table:

ID	LastName	FirstName	Address	City
1	Doe	John	542 W. 27th Street	New York
2	Bloggs	Joe	 	London
3	Roe	Jane	 	New York
4	Smith	John	110 Bishopsgate	London
Suppose that the "Address" column in the "Persons" table is optional. If a record is inserted with no value for "Address", the "Address" column will be saved with a NULL value.


The IS NULL Operator
The following SQL statement uses the IS NULL operator to list all persons that have no address:

SELECT LastName, FirstName, Address FROM Persons
WHERE Address IS NULL;
The result-set will look like this:

LastName	FirstName	Address
Bloggs	Joe	 
Roe	Jane	 
Tip: Always use IS NULL to look for NULL values.

The IS NOT NULL Operator
The following SQL statement uses the IS NOT NULL operator to list all persons that do have an address:

SELECT LastName, FirstName, Address FROM Persons
WHERE Address IS NOT NULL;
The result-set will look like this:

LastName	FirstName	Address
Doe	John	542 W. 27th Street
Smith	John	110 Bishopsgate


--------

SQL PRIMARY KEY Constraint
❮ PreviousNext ❯
SQL PRIMARY KEY Constraint
The PRIMARY KEY constraint uniquely identifies each record in a database table.

Primary keys must contain UNIQUE values, and cannot contain NULL values.

A table can have only one primary key, which may consist of single or multiple fields.

SQL PRIMARY KEY on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL creates a PRIMARY KEY on the "ID" column when the "Persons" table is created:

MySQL:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    PRIMARY KEY (ID)
);
SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
);
To allow naming of a PRIMARY KEY constraint, and for defining a PRIMARY KEY constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    CONSTRAINT PK_Person PRIMARY KEY (ID,LastName)
);
Note: In the example above there is only ONE PRIMARY KEY (PK_Person). However, the VALUE of the primary key is made up of TWO COLUMNS (ID + LastName).

SQL PRIMARY KEY on ALTER TABLE
To create a PRIMARY KEY constraint on the "ID" column when the table is already created, use the following SQL:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:

ALTER TABLE Persons
ADD PRIMARY KEY (ID);
To allow naming of a PRIMARY KEY constraint, and for defining a PRIMARY KEY constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:

ALTER TABLE Persons
ADD CONSTRAINT PK_Person PRIMARY KEY (ID,LastName);
Note: If you use the ALTER TABLE statement to add a primary key, the primary key column(s) must already have been declared to not contain NULL values (when the table was first created).

DROP a PRIMARY KEY Constraint
To drop a PRIMARY KEY constraint, use the following SQL:

MySQL:

ALTER TABLE Persons
DROP PRIMARY KEY;
SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:

ALTER TABLE Persons
DROP CONSTRAINT PK_Person;

-------

SQL AUTO INCREMENT Field
❮ PreviousNext ❯
AUTO INCREMENT Field
Auto-increment allows a unique number to be generated automatically when a new record is inserted into a table.

Often this is the primary key field that we would like to be created automatically every time a new record is inserted.

Syntax for MySQL
The following SQL statement defines the "ID" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    PRIMARY KEY (ID)
);
MySQL uses the AUTO_INCREMENT keyword to perform an auto-increment feature.

By default, the starting value for AUTO_INCREMENT is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

To let the AUTO_INCREMENT sequence start with another value, use the following SQL statement:

ALTER TABLE Persons AUTO_INCREMENT=100;
To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "ID" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen');
The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "ID" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

Syntax for SQL Server
The following SQL statement defines the "ID" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int IDENTITY(1,1) PRIMARY KEY,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
);
The MS SQL Server uses the IDENTITY keyword to perform an auto-increment feature.

In the example above, the starting value for IDENTITY is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

Tip: To specify that the "ID" column should start at value 10 and increment by 5, change it to IDENTITY(10,5).

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "ID" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen');
The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "ID" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".


Syntax for Access
The following SQL statement defines the "ID" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:

CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID Integer PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
);
The MS Access uses the AUTOINCREMENT keyword to perform an auto-increment feature.

By default, the starting value for AUTOINCREMENT is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

Tip: To specify that the "ID" column should start at value 10 and increment by 5, change the autoincrement to AUTOINCREMENT(10,5).

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "ID" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen');
The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "P_Id" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

Syntax for Oracle
In Oracle the code is a little bit more tricky.

You will have to create an auto-increment field with the sequence object (this object generates a number sequence).

Use the following CREATE SEQUENCE syntax:

CREATE SEQUENCE seq_person
MINVALUE 1
START WITH 1
INCREMENT BY 1
CACHE 10;
The code above creates a sequence object called seq_person, that starts with 1 and will increment by 1. It will also cache up to 10 values for performance. The cache option specifies how many sequence values will be stored in memory for faster access.

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will have to use the nextval function (this function retrieves the next value from seq_person sequence):

INSERT INTO Persons (ID,FirstName,LastName)
VALUES (seq_person.nextval,'Lars','Monsen');
The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "ID" column would be assigned the next number from the seq_person sequence. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".
