What you'll be doing with SQL Databases
Create a multi-table database
Create at least two related tables in your database. That is, the id in one table should be stored as a value in the second database. (See the demo for an example). Remember to have one primary, auto-incremented field in each table, something that you'll usually call id. Don't use spaces or capital letters in your table or field names. Assign appropriate datatypes for each field, usually INT for numbers, VARCHAR or TEXT for text, and DATE for dates.

If one of your tables is simple and small enough (tag labels, for example), manually enter data into it.

Note that at this point you should be creating your personal project that you described, not just copying my demo project.

Create a connection script
Create a PHP file that stores the settings necessary to connect to your database. By connecting to this script on pages that interact with MySQL, you won't need to constantly reenter that data. Consult the how-to or wiki from your server company for the settings you'll need to use.

Create a query that inserts a record
Reconfigure your form so that it points to a MySQL script that inserts your form data into your table. You may need to create a new form to do this, but by now you know how to do that.

Confirm record insertion
If the record has been created successfully, tell the page to confirm that fact and notify the user of the new record number. In practice, you wouldn't do this (id numbers aren't usually helpful to people, just machines), but, for now, let's try it.


--------
<h1>VIDEO STUFF:</h1>

Here's the connection code you can adapt and use:

<?php
$user = "your_user_name";
$db = "your_db_name";
$host = "mysql.site.com";
$pw = "xyz123";
$conn = mysqli_connect($host, $user, $pw, $db);
// Check connection
if (!$conn) {
 die("Connection failed: " . mysqli_connect_error());
}
//echo "Connected successfully";
?>
