<h1>What You'll Need To Know About Detail Pages And Record Editing:</h1>

Passing data between pages
$_ GET (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. This data is passed in the URL, so it's visible to users. In most cases, you'll be passing primary key information so that you can search for a single record. For example, catalog.php?product_id=123 will let us create a query that only pulls information for the produce with the id of 123. For long content (text from forms) or secure data (passwords), you'd use $_ POST instead. (In the link, scroll down to the _ POST and _ GET sections at the bottom of the page.)

$_ SESSION (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. Temporarily stores data like usernames while a visitor is at the site. They can be used to create a login verification, for example, so that once someone successfully logs into a site, we can create a session variable called something like "$_ SESSION['login'] = true", then test that on every page. Once the session expires (when the window is closed or when it's destroyed when a user logs out), the login will become false and the pages can redirect users to the login screen.

$_ COOKIE (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. This leaves little pieces of data stored to the user's hard drive. Because the data is associated with your url, you can have your pages look here whenever the url is visited. Sites commonly store user id's here (never passwords) so they know who's visiting. This is why Amazon and Netflix know who you are when you visit their sites.

Updating records
Update (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. syntax. Use the primary key in the "where" statement to specify what record you're updating, otherwise every record will change.

Deleting records
Similar syntax (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and method (use primary key) to updating, except that your record is gone.

Redirecting to another page
We can tell PHP to take us to another page when it's finished running a script using the header (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. function. For example, we can take users to one page if they successfully log in, and to another if they fail. The header function is also commonly used after forms so that the page redirects after a record has been processed. (In the linked page, you only need to understand the first example. The other two examples lower on the page are not applicable to what we're doing.)
