JQuery Basics
JQuery is a language designed to let developers create fairly complex Javascript functions with very little additional code. JQ is most effectively in letting users manipulate elements on a page without having to refresh or recreate the page from the server. Because the changes are client side (as opposed to server side), pages start to feel more like applications than static pages.

Conveniently, JQuery targets elements in much the same way as CSS does, so if you remember your CSS, you can start making changes with JQ.

--------

Menu
Themeable menu with mouse and keyboard interactions for navigation.

Examples
Default functionality
Categories
Icons

A menu with the default configuration, disabled items and nested menus. A list is transformed, adding theming, mouse and keyboard navigation support. Try to tab to the menu then use the cursor keys to navigate.

 view source
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
  <title>jQuery UI Menu - Default functionality</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="//code.jquery.com/ui/1.12.1/themes/base/jquery-ui.css">
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="/resources/demos/style.css">
  <script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-1.12.4.js"></script>
  <script src="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.12.1/jquery-ui.js"></script>
  <script>
  $( function() {
    $( "#menu" ).menu();
  } );
  </script>
  <style>
  .ui-menu { width: 150px; }
  </style>
</head>
<body>

<ul id="menu">
  <li class="ui-state-disabled"><div>Toys (n/a)</div></li>
  <li><div>Books</div></li>
  <li><div>Clothing</div></li>
  <li><div>Electronics</div>
    <ul>
      <li class="ui-state-disabled"><div>Home Entertainment</div></li>
      <li><div>Car Hifi</div></li>
      <li><div>Utilities</div></li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><div>Movies</div></li>
  <li><div>Music</div>
    <ul>
      <li><div>Rock</div>
        <ul>
          <li><div>Alternative</div></li>
          <li><div>Classic</div></li>
        </ul>
      </li>
      <li><div>Jazz</div>
        <ul>
          <li><div>Freejazz</div></li>
          <li><div>Big Band</div></li>
          <li><div>Modern</div></li>
        </ul>
      </li>
      <li><div>Pop</div></li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li class="ui-state-disabled"><div>Specials (n/a)</div></li>
</ul>


</body>
</html>

-----------


jQuery Effects - Hide and Show
❮ PreviousNext ❯
Hide, Show, Toggle, Slide, Fade, and Animate. WOW!

Click to show/hide panel
Examples
jQuery hide()
Demonstrates a simple jQuery hide() method.

jQuery hide()
Another hide() demonstration. How to hide parts of text.

jQuery hide() and show()
With jQuery, you can hide and show HTML elements with the hide() and show() methods:

Example
$("#hide").click(function(){
    $("p").hide();
});

$("#show").click(function(){
    $("p").show();
});
Try it Yourself »
Syntax:

$(selector).hide(speed,callback);

$(selector).show(speed,callback);
The optional speed parameter specifies the speed of the hiding/showing, and can take the following values: "slow", "fast", or milliseconds.

The optional callback parameter is a function to be executed after the hide() or show() method completes (you will learn more about callback functions in a later chapter).

The following example demonstrates the speed parameter with hide():

Example
$("button").click(function(){
    $("p").hide(1000);
});
Try it Yourself »

jQuery toggle()
With jQuery, you can toggle between the hide() and show() methods with the toggle() method.

Shown elements are hidden and hidden elements are shown:

Example
$("button").click(function(){
    $("p").toggle();
});
Try it Yourself »
Syntax:

$(selector).toggle(speed,callback);
The optional speed parameter can take the following values: "slow", "fast", or milliseconds.

The optional callback parameter is a function to be executed after toggle() completes.

---------

Dialog
Open content in an interactive overlay.

Examples
Default functionality
Animation
Modal confirmation
Modal form
Modal message

The basic dialog window is an overlay positioned within the viewport and is protected from page content (like select elements) shining through with an iframe. It has a title bar and a content area, and can be moved, resized and closed with the 'x' icon by default.

 view source
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
  <title>jQuery UI Dialog - Default functionality</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="//code.jquery.com/ui/1.12.1/themes/base/jquery-ui.css">
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="/resources/demos/style.css">
  <script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-1.12.4.js"></script>
  <script src="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.12.1/jquery-ui.js"></script>
  <script>
  $( function() {
    $( "#dialog" ).dialog();
  } );
  </script>
</head>
<body>

<div id="dialog" title="Basic dialog">
  <p>This is the default dialog which is useful for displaying information. The dialog window can be moved, resized and closed with the 'x' icon.</p>
</div>


</body>
</html>

-------------

jQuery Syntax
❮ PreviousNext ❯
With jQuery you select (query) HTML elements and perform "actions" on them.

jQuery Syntax
The jQuery syntax is tailor-made for selecting HTML elements and performing some action on the element(s).

Basic syntax is: $(selector).action()

A $ sign to define/access jQuery
A (selector) to "query (or find)" HTML elements
A jQuery action() to be performed on the element(s)
Examples:

$(this).hide() - hides the current element.

$("p").hide() - hides all <p> elements.

$(".test").hide() - hides all elements with class="test".

$("#test").hide() - hides the element with id="test".

Are you familiar with CSS selectors?

jQuery uses CSS syntax to select elements. You will learn more about the selector syntax in the next chapter of this tutorial.

The Document Ready Event
You might have noticed that all jQuery methods in our examples, are inside a document ready event:

$(document).ready(function(){

   // jQuery methods go here...

});
This is to prevent any jQuery code from running before the document is finished loading (is ready).

It is good practice to wait for the document to be fully loaded and ready before working with it. This also allows you to have your JavaScript code before the body of your document, in the head section.

Here are some examples of actions that can fail if methods are run before the document is fully loaded:

Trying to hide an element that is not created yet
Trying to get the size of an image that is not loaded yet
Tip: The jQuery team has also created an even shorter method for the document ready event:

$(function(){

   // jQuery methods go here...

});
Use the syntax you prefer. We think that the document ready event is easier to understand when reading the code

-------------


jQuery Selectors
❮ PreviousNext ❯
jQuery selectors are one of the most important parts of the jQuery library.

jQuery Selectors
jQuery selectors allow you to select and manipulate HTML element(s).

jQuery selectors are used to "find" (or select) HTML elements based on their name, id, classes, types, attributes, values of attributes and much more. It's based on the existing CSS Selectors, and in addition, it has some own custom selectors.

All selectors in jQuery start with the dollar sign and parentheses: $().

The element Selector
The jQuery element selector selects elements based on the element name.

You can select all <p> elements on a page like this:

$("p")
Example

When a user clicks on a button, all <p> elements will be hidden:

Example
$(document).ready(function(){
    $("button").click(function(){
        $("p").hide();
    });
});
Try it Yourself »
The #id Selector
The jQuery #id selector uses the id attribute of an HTML tag to find the specific element.

An id should be unique within a page, so you should use the #id selector when you want to find a single, unique element.

To find an element with a specific id, write a hash character, followed by the id of the HTML element:

$("#test")
Example

When a user clicks on a button, the element with id="test" will be hidden:

Example
$(document).ready(function(){
    $("button").click(function(){
        $("#test").hide();
    });
});
Try it Yourself »

The .class Selector
The jQuery class selector finds elements with a specific class.

To find elements with a specific class, write a period character, followed by the name of the class:

$(".test")
Example

When a user clicks on a button, the elements with class="test" will be hidden:

Example
$(document).ready(function(){
    $("button").click(function(){
        $(".test").hide();
    });
});
Try it Yourself »
More Examples of jQuery Selectors
Syntax	Description	Example
$("*")	Selects all elements	Try it
$(this)	Selects the current HTML element	Try it
$("p.intro")	Selects all <p> elements with class="intro"	Try it
$("p:first")	Selects the first <p> element	Try it
$("ul li:first")	Selects the first <li> element of the first <ul>	Try it
$("ul li:first-child")	Selects the first <li> element of every <ul>	Try it
$("[href]")	Selects all elements with an href attribute	Try it
$("a[target='_blank']")	Selects all <a> elements with a target attribute value equal to "_blank"	Try it
$("a[target!='_blank']")	Selects all <a> elements with a target attribute value NOT equal to "_blank"	Try it
$(":button")	Selects all <button> elements and <input> elements of type="button"	Try it
$("tr:even")	Selects all even <tr> elements	Try it
$("tr:odd")	Selects all odd <tr> elements	Try it
Use our jQuery Selector Tester to demonstrate the different selectors.

For a complete reference of all the jQuery selectors, please go to our jQuery Selectors Reference.

Functions In a Separate File
If your website contains a lot of pages, and you want your jQuery functions to be easy to maintain, you can put your jQuery functions in a separate .js file.

When we demonstrate jQuery in this tutorial, the functions are added directly into the <head> section. However, sometimes it is preferable to place them in a separate file, like this (use the src attribute to refer to the .js file):

Example
<head>
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.2.1/jquery.min.js">
</script>
<script src="my_jquery_functions.js"></script>
</head>


-----------

jQuery Event Methods
❮ PreviousNext ❯
jQuery is tailor-made to respond to events in an HTML page.

What are Events?
All the different visitor's actions that a web page can respond to are called events.

An event represents the precise moment when something happens.

Examples:

moving a mouse over an element
selecting a radio button
clicking on an element
The term "fires/fired" is often used with events. Example: "The keypress event is fired, the moment you press a key".

Here are some common DOM events:

Mouse Events	Keyboard Events	Form Events	Document/Window Events
click	keypress	submit	load
dblclick	keydown	change	resize
mouseenter	keyup	focus	scroll
mouseleave	 	blur	unload
jQuery Syntax For Event Methods
In jQuery, most DOM events have an equivalent jQuery method.

To assign a click event to all paragraphs on a page, you can do this:

$("p").click();
The next step is to define what should happen when the event fires. You must pass a function to the event:

$("p").click(function(){
  // action goes here!!
});

Commonly Used jQuery Event Methods
$(document).ready()

The $(document).ready() method allows us to execute a function when the document is fully loaded. This event is already explained in the jQuery Syntax chapter.

click()

The click() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed when the user clicks on the HTML element.

The following example says: When a click event fires on a <p> element; hide the current <p> element:

Example
$("p").click(function(){
    $(this).hide();
});
Try it Yourself »
dblclick()

The dblclick() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed when the user double-clicks on the HTML element:

Example
$("p").dblclick(function(){
    $(this).hide();
});
Try it Yourself »
mouseenter()

The mouseenter() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed when the mouse pointer enters the HTML element:

Example
$("#p1").mouseenter(function(){
    alert("You entered p1!");
});
Try it Yourself »
mouseleave()

The mouseleave() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed when the mouse pointer leaves the HTML element:

Example
$("#p1").mouseleave(function(){
    alert("Bye! You now leave p1!");
});
Try it Yourself »
mousedown()

The mousedown() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed, when the left, middle or right mouse button is pressed down, while the mouse is over the HTML element:

Example
$("#p1").mousedown(function(){
    alert("Mouse down over p1!");
});
Try it Yourself »
mouseup()

The mouseup() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML element.

The function is executed, when the left, middle or right mouse button is released, while the mouse is over the HTML element:

Example
$("#p1").mouseup(function(){
    alert("Mouse up over p1!");
});
Try it Yourself »
hover()

The hover() method takes two functions and is a combination of the mouseenter() and mouseleave() methods.

The first function is executed when the mouse enters the HTML element, and the second function is executed when the mouse leaves the HTML element:

Example
$("#p1").hover(function(){
    alert("You entered p1!");
},
function(){
    alert("Bye! You now leave p1!");
});
Try it Yourself »
focus()

The focus() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML form field.

The function is executed when the form field gets focus:

Example
$("input").focus(function(){
    $(this).css("background-color", "#cccccc");
});
Try it Yourself »
blur()

The blur() method attaches an event handler function to an HTML form field.

The function is executed when the form field loses focus:

Example
$("input").blur(function(){
    $(this).css("background-color", "#ffffff");
});
Try it Yourself »
The on() Method
The on() method attaches one or more event handlers for the selected elements.

Attach a click event to a <p> element:

Example
$("p").on("click", function(){
    $(this).hide();
});
Try it Yourself »
Attach multiple event handlers to a <p> element:

Example
$("p").on({
    mouseenter: function(){
        $(this).css("background-color", "lightgray");
    },
    mouseleave: function(){
        $(this).css("background-color", "lightblue");
    },
    click: function(){
        $(this).css("background-color", "yellow");
    }
});



Functions In a Separate File
If your website contains a lot of pages, and you want your jQuery functions to be easy to maintain, you can put your jQuery functions in a separate .js file.

When we demonstrate jQuery in this tutorial, the functions are added directly into the <head> section. However, sometimes it is preferable to place them in a separate file, like this (use the src attribute to refer to the .js file):

Example
<head>
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.2.1/jquery.min.js">
</script>
<script src="my_jquery_functions.js"></script>
</head>
