<h1>What you'll be doing with basic HTML:</h1>

Download an Editor:
We're going to start by creating a basic page, but first, we need something to write it with. I'm not going to specify what software you use in this course because all I, and your end users, will care about is the finished product. Many good free products have more than enough features to carry you through this course. Here's a list (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. that reviews some of the popular and useful editors available, though check that the editor works on your computer. Note that not all of these are free, either. If you don't have regular access to a computer, some of these, like ICEcoder (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and Codeanywhere (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site., are browser based, meaning you can work on your project from any computer. I use Coda (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site., a $99 app for Mac (with an optional $10 iOS add on).

Do not use Word, which will litter your code with word-processing clutter.

Create a Website:
Create a folder on your computer called something like COM 215 Site. In your editing software, make this the home folder of your project (what it's called and how you do it will vary according to the app you're using).
In your new folder, create a file called index.html
Add a title (so it appears in the browser window), heading, paragraph with two or three sentences, and an image.
Size your image so that it's no more than 500 pixels wide.
Create two other html pages, placing one of them into a subdirectory (just a folder) within the main folder. Put a heading and paragraph sentence on each page. The sentences can be brief, and the content is irrelevant (for now).
Link to each of these pages from the index page. Place a link back to the home page on each of these pages.
Link to an external page (i.e. any page on the Internet except the ones you've just created).
Create a subdirectory called images (keep all your titles lowercase, and use _ if you need to underline words), save a jpeg image smaller than 75kb into it, and insert the image into your index.html page.
You should be able to preview your pages on a browser on your computer using the preview function/button in your software. You can also open the index.html file directly from a browser.
