<h1>Debugging your code:</h1>
Some servers will fail loudly when your page has an error and tell you where the problem is by identifying the line number. Some, however, fail quietly and just don't produce anything at all. When that happens, here are a few strategies to try to find the source of the problem.

For HTML code:
You can use the HTML validation checker (Links to an external site.) Links to an external site. (bookmark the page) to either enter the URL, upload your file, or cut and paste your raw code. The output will show you what lines you're having problems with.

For PHP/HTML code:
Because PHP writes HTML on the fly, you can't test your raw PHP code in the checker. You'll need to upload your file to the server and see how it works in the cold cruel world of the Internet.

If, however, you have a quiet failure and no page appears, there'll be nothing to validate. Try one or all of these:

Commenting:
You can disable a line of HTML or PHP code by designating it as a comment. In PHP, you can turn a line of code into a comment by adding // to it. (You can actually use it in the middle of the line, disabling everything after the //, too.)

You can also use / * followed by a * / to disable everything between the symbols.

You can debug your PHP code by commenting out your entire PHP and seeing if your page works. If it does, move the starting / * or ending * / symbols to include a few more lines (making sure you don't split up sections enclosed in brackets or parentheses) and retesting the page. Keep going until your page fails again. The new line(s) that you uncommented will be the source of the error.

Echoing:
If you're not sure at what point the page is breaking down, you can insert something like "echo '1';", "echo '2';" at various points of the code to see which ones get printed to the page. If I see "1" on the page but not "2", I know that something is breaking the code between those points.

You can also echo any of the PHP variables that you set. For example, if I set $user = $_ POST['whatever'];, I can throw the echo command at the beginning of the line ( as in: echo $user - $_ POST['whatever']; ) and it should print out that variable. You can also do this with your Mysql queries to see what variables are being fed into it. So, the line that says $mysqli_query = sprintf ('insert into users (username) values( %s)', $username), can become echo $mysqliQuery = sprintf('yada... will print the query to the top of the page where I might see "insert into users (username) values ('something is going very wrong here') as the output. You can also copy that printed output and paste it directly into your PHPMyAdmin page as a SQL query and see what error messages it gives you there.

Testing:
You can use a site like phptester.net (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. to copy blocks of you PHP code and see where it's breaking down. It will be limited because it can't access remote files (like your commands to include other files), but it can still be a valuable tool.
