<h1>What You'll Be Doing With Servers:</h1>

<b>Enroll with a web host:</b>
So far, the HTML files work on your computer, but they can't be seen by anyone else, so we need to put them somewhere where the world can see them. Although we code the files on local computers, once finished, they're stored in publicly accessible computers called servers. You will need to find a business that sells you server space to host your site. Fortunately, many options cost less than $10 a month. Avoid services that require upfront annual payments. In my experience, people sometimes forget and are surprised by a new charge to their credit cards a year later. Canceling a monthly service is easier than an annual one.

I use Dreamhost for most of my websites, though you can search for other web hosting options. Whatever you choose must let you create a MySQL database, and (for your sake) preferably give you access to a phpMyAdmin page. (You don't need to know what they are yet, but look for those options when you review the server's features.) As a bonus, look for a provider that also offers one-step installs of third-party software like WordPress, though you won't need to use them in this class.

You will also need to register a domain name if you don't own one yet. Often, hosting companies will include one free domain name when you sign up; otherwise, you can register one for around $10 a year for a .com. Other top-level domains (.info, .tv, .biz) will differ in price. GoDaddy is probably the most popular domain registration service, though they will try to upsell you on unneeded services when you do business with them. (One thing they're good at is suggesting options if your first choice is unavailable, so you might want to try them first then register your Plan B name with your chosen hosting company.) If you do use a domain registration service, you'll need to point your name to your server. Your hosting company will give you instructions on how to do that, but it is probably easier to register your domain with the same company you're using to host your pages.

If you register a domain that is close to your name, you can also use it as a permanent email address. I've owned jduncan.com since 2001 and use james@jduncan.com as my permanent personal email address. (I also registered domains for my wife and children in case they ever need them or run for president.)

Here are a few options with prices, though these will change over time depending on sales and discounts, so you might investigate this yourself with a web search:

BlueHost: $8 per month with a free domain.
Dreamhost: $8 per month with a free domain.
HostMonster: $8 per month with a free domain.
PlanetHost: $4 per month, but no free domain.

I've had some users struggle with BlueHost and HostMonster because their systems don't alert you when you have a syntax error, meaning that if your pages fail, you just see a blank page. Dreamhost, on the other hand, will tell you where your file is failing, which is awfully helpful when trying to debug. As for PlanetHost, I don't know if any previous students have used them.

<b>Upload your site:</b>
The details of how you do this will vary according to your editing software and your host, but follow the help prompts for both (this is where Google and YouTube are helpful) to upload it to your server via FTP (File Transfer Protocol). If your editing software doesn't include FTP functionality, set up an FTP client (app) to synchronize your project file with your host (I used the free FileZilla, which works well).

If you use Filezilla, this wiki (https://wiki.filezilla-project.org/Using) may be useful.
