<h1>What You'll Need To Know About Intermediate HTML:</h1>

<b>ul, ol, li:</b> The only tags you need to make lists. Note that lists can be nested, so you can create a new list as a list item, as you can see in the next two items. The top-level list has ul, table, and form, then the table list item has within it a nested unordered list.

<h4>HTML Lists</h4>

Unordered HTML List:
An unordered list starts with the <ul> tag. Each list item starts with the <li> tag.

The list items will be marked with bullets (small black circles) by default:

Example:

```
<ul>
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Unordered HTML List - Choose List Item Marker:
The CSS list-style-type property is used to define the style of the list item marker:

Value	Description:
disc	Sets the list item marker to a bullet (default)
circle	Sets the list item marker to a circle
square	Sets the list item marker to a square
none	The list items will not be marked

Example - Disc:

```
<ul style="list-style-type:disc">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Example - Circle:

```
<ul style="list-style-type:circle">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Example - Square:

```
<ul style="list-style-type:square">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Example - None:

```
<ul style="list-style-type:none">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Ordered HTML List
An ordered list starts with the <ol> tag. Each list item starts with the <li> tag.

The list items will be marked with numbers by default:

Example:

```
<ol>
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

Ordered HTML List - The Type Attribute:
The type attribute of the <ol> tag, defines the type of the list item marker:

type="1":	The list items will be numbered with numbers (default)
type="A": The list items will be numbered with uppercase letters
type="a":	The list items will be numbered with lowercase letters
type="I":	The list items will be numbered with uppercase roman numbers
type="i":	The list items will be numbered with lowercase roman numbers

Numbers:

```
<ol type="1">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

Uppercase Letters:

```
<ol type="A">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

Lowercase Letters:

```
<ol type="a">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

Uppercase Roman Numbers:

```
<ol type="I">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

Lowercase Roman Numbers:

```
<ol type="i">
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ol>
```

HTML Description Lists:

HTML also supports description lists.

A description list is a list of terms, with a description of each term.

The <dl> tag defines the description list, the <dt> tag defines the term (name), and the <dd> tag describes each term:

Example:

```
<dl>
  <dt>Coffee</dt>
  <dd>- black hot drink</dd>
  <dt>Milk</dt>
  <dd>- white cold drink</dd>
</dl>
```

<b>Nested HTML Lists:</b>
List can be nested (lists inside lists):

Example:

```
<ul>
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea
    <ul>
      <li>Black tea</li>
      <li>Green tea</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

Note: List items can contain new list, and other HTML elements, like images and links, etc.

<b>Horizontal Lists:</b>

HTML lists can be styled in many different ways with CSS.

One popular way is to style a list horizontally, to create a menu:

Example:

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<style>
ul {
    list-style-type: none;
    margin: 0;
    padding: 0;
    overflow: hidden;
    background-color: #333333;
}

li {
    float: left;
}

li a {
    display: block;
    color: white;
    text-align: center;
    padding: 16px;
    text-decoration: none;
}

li a:hover {
    background-color: #111111;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>

<ul>
  <li><a href="#home">Home</a></li>
  <li><a href="#news">News</a></li>
  <li><a href="#contact">Contact</a></li>
  <li><a href="#about">About</a></li>
</ul>

</body>
</html>
```

<h3>Chapter Summary:</h3>
Use the HTML <ul> element to define an unordered list
Use the CSS list-style-type property to define the list item marker
Use the HTML <ol> element to define an ordered list
Use the HTML type attribute to define the numbering type
Use the HTML <li> element to define a list item
Use the HTML <dl> element to define a description list
Use the HTML <dt> element to define the description term
Use the HTML <dd> element to describe the term in a description list
Lists can be nested inside lists
List items can contain other HTML elements
Use the CSS property float:left or display:inline to display a list horizontally

<b>HTML List Tags:</b>

< ul >	Defines an unordered list
< ol >	Defines an ordered list
< li >	Defines a list item
< dl >	Defines a description list
< dt >	Defines a term in a description list
< dd >	Describes the term in a description list

-----

<b>table:</b>

<b>th:</b> Creates the heading for the table.
<b>tr:</b> Creates a row
<b>td:</b> The cells where data is put. Cells can include other tables, paragraphs, lists, images, forms, or pretty much any other HTML element.
<b>caption:</b> Gives the table a title

<h4>HTML Tables:</h4>

Defining an HTML Table:

An HTML table is defined with the <table> tag.

Each table row is defined with the <tr> tag. A table header is defined with the <th> tag. By default, table headings are bold and centered. A table data/cell is defined with the <td> tag.

Example:

```
<table style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <th>Firstname</th>
    <th>Lastname</th>
    <th>Age</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Jill</td>
    <td>Smith</td>
    <td>50</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Eve</td>
    <td>Jackson</td>
    <td>94</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```

Note: The <td> elements are the data containers of the table.
They can contain all sorts of HTML elements; text, images, lists, other tables, etc.

HTML Table - Adding a Border:

If you do not specify a border for the table, it will be displayed without borders.

A border is set using the CSS border property:

Example:

```
table, th, td {
    border: 1px solid black;
}
```

Remember to define borders for both the table and the table cells.

HTML Table - Collapsed Borders:

If you want the borders to collapse into one border, add the CSS border-collapse property:

Example:

```
table, th, td {
    border: 1px solid black;
    border-collapse: collapse;
}
```

HTML Table - Adding Cell Padding:

Cell padding specifies the space between the cell content and its borders.

If you do not specify a padding, the table cells will be displayed without padding.

To set the padding, use the CSS padding property:

Example:

```
th, td {
    padding: 15px;
}
```

HTML Table - Left-align Headings:

By default, table headings are bold and centered.

To left-align the table headings, use the CSS text-align property:

Example:

```
th {
    text-align: left;
}
```

HTML Table - Adding Border Spacing:

Border spacing specifies the space between the cells.

To set the border spacing for a table, use the CSS border-spacing property:

Example:

```
table {
    border-spacing: 5px;
}
```

Note: If the table has collapsed borders, border-spacing has no effect.

HTML Table - Cells that Span Many Columns:

To make a cell span more than one column, use the colspan attribute:

Example:

```
<table style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th colspan="2">Telephone</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Bill Gates</td>
    <td>55577854</td>
    <td>55577855</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```

HTML Table - Cells that Span Many Rows:

To make a cell span more than one row, use the rowspan attribute:

Example:

```
<table style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <th>Name:</th>
    <td>Bill Gates</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Telephone:</th>
    <td>55577854</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>55577855</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```

HTML Table - Adding a Caption:

To add a caption to a table, use the <caption> tag:

Example:

```
<table style="width:100%">
  <caption>Monthly savings</caption>
  <tr>
    <th>Month</th>
    <th>Savings</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>January</td>
    <td>$100</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>February</td>
    <td>$50</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```

Note: The <caption> tag must be inserted immediately after the <table> tag.

A Special Style for One Table:

To define a special style for a special table, add an id attribute to the table:

Example:

```
<table id="t01">
  <tr>
    <th>Firstname</th>
    <th>Lastname</th>
    <th>Age</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Eve</td>
    <td>Jackson</td>
    <td>94</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```

Now you can define a special style for this table:

```
table#t01 {
    width: 100%;
    background-color: #f1f1c1;
}
```

And add more styles:

```
table#t01 tr:nth-child(even) {
    background-color: #eee;
}
table#t01 tr:nth-child(odd) {
    background-color: #fff;
}
table#t01 th {
    color: white;
    background-color: black;
}
```

Chapter Summary:

Use the HTML <table> element to define a table
Use the HTML <tr> element to define a table row
Use the HTML <td> element to define a table data
Use the HTML <th> element to define a table heading
Use the HTML <caption> element to define a table caption
Use the CSS border property to define a border
Use the CSS border-collapse property to collapse cell borders
Use the CSS padding property to add padding to cells
Use the CSS text-align property to align cell text
Use the CSS border-spacing property to set the spacing between cells
Use the colspan attribute to make a cell span many columns
Use the rowspan attribute to make a cell span many rows
Use the id attribute to uniquely define one table

HTML Table Tags:

<b>< table >:</b>	Defines a table
<b>< th >:</b>	Defines a header cell in a table
<b>< tr >:</b>	Defines a row in a table
<b>< td >:</b>	Defines a cell in a table
<b>< caption >:</b>	Defines a table caption
<b>< colgroup >:</b>	Specifies a group of one or more columns in a table for formatting
<b>< col >:</b>	Specifies column properties for each column within a <colgroup> element
<b>< thead >:</b>	Groups the header content in a table
<b>< tbody >:</b>	Groups the body content in a table
<b>< tfoot >:</b>	Groups the footer content in a table

-----

<b>form:</b>

<b>input:</b> For short amounts of text or numbers
<b>textarea:</b> For larger amounts of text over multiple lines
<b>radio:</b> To select just one option of two or more
<b>checkbox:</b> To select one or more options at the same time
<b>submit:</b> Initiates an action with the form, usually sending the data to a server.

HTML Forms:

The < form > Element:

The HTML < form > element defines a form that is used to collect user input:

< form >
.
form elements
.
< /form >

An HTML form contains form elements.

Form elements are different types of input elements, like text fields, checkboxes, radio buttons, submit buttons, and more.

The < input > Element:

The < input > element is the most important form element.

The < input > element can be displayed in several ways, depending on the type attribute.

Here are some examples:

Type	Description:
<b>< input type="text" >:</b>	Defines a one-line text input field
<b>< input type="radio" >:</b>	Defines a radio button (for selecting one of many choices)
<b>< input type="submit" >:</b>	Defines a submit button (for submitting the form)
You will learn a lot more about input types later in this tutorial.

Text Input:
< input type="text" > defines a one-line input field for text input:

Example:

```
<form>
  First name:<br>
  <input type="text" name="firstname"><br>
  Last name:<br>
  <input type="text" name="lastname">
</form>
```

Note: The form itself is not visible. Also note that the default width of a text field is 20 characters.

Radio Button Input:

<input type="radio"> defines a radio button.

Radio buttons let a user select ONE of a limited number of choices:

Example:

```
<form>
  <input type="radio" name="gender" value="male" checked> Male<br>
  <input type="radio" name="gender" value="female"> Female<br>
  <input type="radio" name="gender" value="other"> Other
</form>
```

The Submit Button:

< input type="submit" > defines a button for submitting the form data to a form-handler.

The form-handler is typically a server page with a script for processing input data.

The form-handler is specified in the form's action attribute:

Example:

```
<form action="/action_page.php">
  First name:<br>
  <input type="text" name="firstname" value="Mickey"><br>
  Last name:<br>
  <input type="text" name="lastname" value="Mouse"><br><br>
  <input type="submit" value="Submit">
</form>
```

The Action Attribute:
The action attribute defines the action to be performed when the form is submitted.

Normally, the form data is sent to a web page on the server when the user clicks on the submit button.

In the example above, the form data is sent to a page on the server called "/action_page.php". This page contains a server-side script that handles the form data:

```
<form action="/action_page.php">
```

If the action attribute is omitted, the action is set to the current page.

The Method Attribute:

The method attribute specifies the HTTP method (GET or POST) to be used when submitting the form data:

```
<form action="/action_page.php" method="get">
```

or:

```
<form action="/action_page.php" method="post">
```

<b>When to Use GET?:</b>
The default method when submitting form data is GET.

However, when GET is used, the submitted form data will be visible in the page address field:

/action_page.php?firstname=Mickey&lastname=Mouse

Note: GET must NOT be used when sending sensitive information! GET is best suited for short, non-sensitive, amounts of data, because it has size limitations too.

<b>When to Use POST?:</b>
Always use POST if the form data contains sensitive or personal information. The POST method does not display the submitted form data in the page address field.

POST has no size limitations, and can be used to send large amounts of data.

The Name Attribute:

Each input field must have a name attribute to be submitted.

If the name attribute is omitted, the data of that input field will not be sent at all.

This example will only submit the "Last name" input field:

Example:

```
<form action="/action_page.php">
  First name:<br>
  <input type="text" value="Mickey"><br>
  Last name:<br>
  <input type="text" name="lastname" value="Mouse"><br><br>
  <input type="submit" value="Submit">
</form>
```

Grouping Form Data with <fieldset>:

The <fieldset> element is used to group related data in a form.

The <legend> element defines a caption for the <fieldset> element.

Example:

```
<form action="/action_page.php">
  <fieldset>
    <legend>Personal information:</legend>
    First name:<br>
    <input type="text" name="firstname" value="Mickey"><br>
    Last name:<br>
    <input type="text" name="lastname" value="Mouse"><br><br>
    <input type="submit" value="Submit">
  </fieldset>
</form>
```

Here is the list of <form> attributes:

Attribute	Description:

<b>accept-charset:</b>	Specifies the charset used in the submitted form (default: the page charset).
<b>action:</b>	Specifies an address (url) where to submit the form (default: the submitting page).
<b>autocomplete:</b>	Specifies if the browser should autocomplete the form (default: on).
<b>enctype:</b>	Specifies the encoding of the submitted data (default: is url-encoded).
<b>method:</b>	Specifies the HTTP method used when submitting the form (default: GET).
<b>name:</b>	Specifies a name used to identify the form (for DOM usage: document.forms.name).
<b>novalidate:</b>	Specifies that the browser should not validate the form.
<b>target:</b>	Specifies the target of the address in the action attribute (default: _ self).

-----

<h3>Inline and Block Elements:</h3>

Though we won't be doing anything with these concepts right now, this is a good time to introduce you to the difference between HTML elements (something created by a tag) that are stacked on top of each other on a page (block elements) versus placed alongside each other (inline elements). When you write a paper, your paragraphs would be block elements and your words would be inline elements. Some poets

experiment

  by

    making words

      block elements.

But enough poetic creativity, for now start to think about whether the things you put on the page are arranged like a stack of blocks or like words in a non-poetic sentence. You can think about block elements has having sharp elbows; you don't want to sit beside them at the dinner table. Inline elements, on the other hand, are nice and friendly and always want to hold your hand.

Here's a summary (BELOW) of the differences and a list of some of the common inline and block elements. (As with most things with HTML, we can change something from block to inline and vice versa, but we'll worry about that later.) Sometimes when pages don't look the way we think they should, it's because of the inline/block behaviors of various elements.

---

<h3>HTML Block and Inline Elements:</h3>

Every HTML element has a default display value depending on what type of element it is. The default display value for most elements is block or inline.

Block-level Elements:
A block-level element always starts on a new line and takes up the full width available (stretches out to the left and right as far as it can).

The <div> element is a block-level element.

Examples of block-level elements:

<b><div></b>
<b><h1> - <h6></b>
<b><p></b>
<b><form></b>

Inline Elements:

An inline element does not start on a new line and only takes up as much width as necessary.

This is an inline <span> element inside a paragraph.

Examples of inline elements:

<b>< span ></b>
<b>< a ></b>
<b>< img ></b>

The < div > Element:

The < div > element is often used as a container for other HTML elements.

The < div > element has no required attributes, but both style and class are common.

When used together with CSS, the <div> element can be used to style blocks of content:

Example:

```
<div style="background-color:black;color:white;padding:20px;">
  <h2>London</h2>
  <p>London is the capital city of England. It is the most populous city in the United Kingdom, with a metropolitan area of over 13 million inhabitants.</p>
</div>
```

The < span > Element:

The < span > element is often used as a container for some text.

The < span > element has no required attributes, but both style and class are common.

When used together with CSS, the <span> element can be used to style parts of the text:

Example:

```
<h1>My <span style="color:red">Important</span> Heading</h1>
```

HTML Grouping Tags:

Tag	Description:

<b><div>:</b>	Defines a section in a document (block-level)
<b><span>:</b>	Defines a section in a document (inline)
