<h1>What You'll Be Doing With Intermediate HTML:</h1>

We'll be adding a few common page elements beyond just headings and paragraphs. At this point we're not worried about how the page looks; all we're concerned about is content (though, at this point in the course, we aren't even terribly concerned about that). Make stuff up to fill your pages if you need to.

1. Create a new page called course_data.html and link to it from your home (index) page. Also create a link at the bottom of this new page back home.

2. The two most common ways to organize data is by using lists and tables, so make a list of your five favorite textbooks from any class or semester ranked from favorite to least favorite. This will be in an ordered list. Give this and all the other elements a descriptive H2 heading.

3. Make an unordered list of the classes you took last semester. Ranking doesn't matter.
4. Create a table with the following columns, and then enter the data for each class you're taking this semester.
Course Code
Course Name
Professor
Textbooks (This should be an unordered list, illustrating the idea that you can put any kind of content inside a table cell, even nested tables. Even is you have only one book, format it as a list item.)

5. Create a form with the following fields, placing each of the items below within a paragraph tag, and including a label before each input field.
Course Code
Course Name
Semester, with a menu option of Fall, Spring, Summer
Type of course with a radio button of Required or Elective. Have the "Required" option already selected (BELOW).
Delivery style with checkboxes of Seated, Online, and Hybrid. (This really should be a radio group because a class would only be in one category so we want to limit a user to just one answer, but we'll ignore logic for a moment just for the practice.)
Course description with a textarea field. Add a placeholder (BELOW) inviting the user to describe the course.
Submit button
Send the data to a new file called form_confirmation.html with some text acknowledging that the form has been completed
You'll need to set the action attribute for the form to direct the submitted form to go to that page

-----

<h3>HTML <input> checked Attribute:</h3>

Example:

An HTML form with a pre-selected checkbox:

```
<form action="/action_page.php">
  <input type="checkbox" name="vehicle" value="Bike"> I have a bike<br>
  <input type="checkbox" name="vehicle" value="Car" checked> I have a car<br>
  <input type="submit" value="Submit">
</form>

```

Definition and Usage:

The checked attribute is a boolean attribute.

When present, it specifies that an <input> element should be pre-selected (checked) when the page loads.

The checked attribute can be used with <input type="checkbox"> and <input type="radio">.

The checked attribute can also be set after the page load, with a JavaScript.

-----

<h3>HTML <textarea> placeholder Attribute:</h3>

Example:

A text area with a placeholder text:

```
<textarea placeholder="Describe yourself here..."></textarea>
```

Definition and Usage:

The placeholder attribute specifies a short hint that describes the expected value of a text area.

The short hint is displayed in the text area before the user enters a value.
